---
title: 'Nanobiomaterials: Stem Cell Interaction and Role in Tissue Engineering'
authors:
- Swati Midha
- Anjali Chauhan
- Deborah Sybil
- R. S. Neelakandan
journal: Advances in Dental Implantology Using Nanomaterials and Allied Technology
  Applications
year: 2021
pages: 153-168
url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-52207-0_7
publisher: Springer International Publishing
source_file: midha-2021-nanobiomaterials-stem-cell-interaction-and-role-in-tissue-engineering.md
chapter_doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52207-0_7
book_title: Advances in Dental Implantology Using Nanomaterials and Allied Technology
  Applications
book_editors:
- R. S. Chaughule
- Rajesh Dashaputra
book_publisher: Springer International Publishing
book_doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-52207-0
book_isbn: '9783030522070'
publication_year: 2021
---
# Nanobiomaterials: Stem Cell Interaction and Role in Tissue Engineering

Swati Midha, Anjali Chauhan, Deborah Sybil, and R. S. Neelakandan

Abstract The aim of regenerative medicine is to achieve structural and functional rehabilitation of the damaged tissues and organs affected by trauma, age-related, congenital, or disease incurred injuries. In view of the recent findings, the field of nanotechnology has evolved as a promising candidate for providing advanced nano-functional biomaterials with customizable morphologies, properties, and functions that can recapitulate the exact in vivo microenvironment down to the extracellular matrix level that can promote cellular adhesion, proliferation, differentiation, and morphogenesis in a controlled spatiotemporal manner. In this chapter, we intend to summarize the role of nanobiomaterials in the field of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine by elaborating on their properties, biological interaction with stem cells, and applications in musculoskeletal research, particularly in bone and cartilage.

Keywords Scaffolds  $\cdot$  Nanotechnology  $\cdot$  Tissue regeneration  $\cdot$  Stem cells  $\cdot$  Nanobiomaterials

# 1 Introduction

The foremost principle of tissue reconstruction is to replace "like with like." The "gold standard" graft material for lost tissue has been autogenous tissue: skin grafts for burns, muscle grafts for bulk loss, bone for skeletal reconstruction, etc. Autogenous grafting provides the best results but has disadvantages of donor site

S. Midha  $\cdot$  A. Chauhan (

Special Centre for Nanoscience, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India

D. Sybil

Faculty of Dentistry, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, India

R. S. Neelakandan

Meenakshi Ammal Dental College and Research Centre, Chennai, India morbidity, limited availability, additional surgical time, and post-operative temporary mobility impairment [1]. Allogeneic grafting overcomes the shortcomings associated with autogenous grafts. Allografts are considered to be biocompatible, exhibit good post-operative response, without donor site morbidity [2]. These have the advantage of shorter surgery time, abundant bone supply, and elimination of donor site morbidity but there are risks of infection transmission, immune reaction, and insufficient literature support. Alloplastic grafts and xenografts are limited in use and their clinical success is not adequately supported by literature. These drawbacks have led to the search for better alternatives. Alternatives to autologous graft should satisfy three criteria assured by autogenous grafting: cell laden grafts, production of biological moieties stimulating tissue formation, and stimulation of endogenous tissue-forming cells to migrate into the defect. Unfortunately, none of the currently available grafting alternatives intrinsically satisfy all the above criteria. One of the most promising techniques currently being developed for tissue regeneration is tissue engineering using autogenous cell transplantation. Tissue engineering aims to regenerate damaged and/or lost tissues by integrated use of biomaterials, optimal source of cells along with biological factors, providing new tools for regenerative therapy [3].

# 2 Tissue Engineering

Two major kinds of cells can be used: undifferentiated mesenchymal stem cells (UMSC) and differentiated precursor cells. Literature suggests that UMSC enhance tissue formation as compared to their differentiated counterparts. So far, bone marrow stem cells have shown undebatable potential in bone regeneration. Their unique properties, such as stemness, multilineage differentiation under different stimuli, and relative cell harvesting density, make them a popular source for cell-based approaches [4]. The various tissue sources of stem cells are listed in Table 1.

Table 1 Various cell sources and scaffolds currently used in tissue engineering  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Sources of cells</td><td colspan="4">Scaffolds</td></tr><tr><td>Natural</td><td>Mineral based</td><td>Synthetic</td><td>Hybrid</td></tr><tr><td>Bone marrow</td><td>Collagen</td><td>Calcium phosphate</td><td>Polyglycolic acid</td><td>Polymer with noncrystalline apatite coating</td></tr><tr><td>Adipose tissue</td><td>Hyaluronic acid</td><td></td><td>Polylactic acid</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Periosteum</td><td>Chitin</td><td></td><td>Polydioxanone</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Umbilical cord</td><td>Chitosan</td><td></td><td>Polycaprolactone</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cancellous bone</td><td>Alginate</td><td></td><td>Pluronics (polypropylene + polyethylene)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Dental pulp</td><td>Silk</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

Scaffolds used in tissue engineering must fulfill certain standards like ease of fabrication, ease of cell penetration, proliferation and distribution, ability to vascularize once implanted, ability to maintain mature cell phenotype, appropriate biodegradation, and their ability to get completely replaced by neo-tissue. An ideal scaffold material is the one that resorbs at the same time as the new tissue formation occurs. In cases where resorption occurs too fast, the graft site contracts before new tissue is formed, whereas, if the resorption is too slow, delay in the process of neo-tissue formation occurs [5]. Various scaffolds used in tissue engineering are listed in Table 1.

The role of growth factors in tissue engineered grafts is to provide signals and induct progenitor cells at the defect site. Platelet-rich blood substances which are autologous have shown to provide various growth factors, like platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), transforming growth factor (TGF), insulin-like growth factor (IGF), epithelial growth factor (EGF), and recombinant human basic fibroblast growth factor. Table 2 lists the various growth factors used in bone tissue engineering.

A wide variety of natural and synthetic polymers have been utilized for formation of various human tissues. Among all the available materials, collagen and PGA have been widely tested for most of the tissues regenerated in humans. Natural, synthetic, and electroconductive polymers were used in vivo for neural tissue regeneration but human studies are yet to be conducted. Only collagen among natural polymers has been used in clinical human studies [6]. Autologous scaffolds have the advantage of biocompatibility and minimal tissue reaction but lack structural and mechanical durability. Table 3 enlists the scaffolds utilized in regeneration of various tissues for human application.

# 3 Nanobiomaterials

As already discussed, tissue engineering (TE) is primarily the study of engineering new tissues and organs in order to replace or regenerate the lost or diseased parts. The three basic components that drive the TE process are cells, scaffolds, and biological milieu. The scaffolds serve as three-dimensional (3D) substrates that facilitate the attachment, growth, proliferation, migration, and differentiation of progenitor cells into desirable lineages. The growth factors or the biological milieu introduced into the scaffolds or the culture media direct the transition of cells

Table 2 Growth factors used in bone tissue engineering  

<table><tr><td>Osteoinductive</td><td>Osteoconductive</td><td>Osteogenic</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Demineralized lyophilized bone</td><td>Lyophilized bone</td><td>Mesenchymal stem cells</td></tr><tr><td>Ceramics</td><td>Marrow</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Bone morphogenetic protein 2,4,7,9</td><td>Bioglass</td><td>Platelet-rich plasma</td></tr><tr><td>Coral-derived Polylactic (PLA) and polyglycolic acid (PGA)</td><td>Gene therapy Fibroblast growth factors Platelet-derived growth factors</td></tr></table>

Table 3 Tissue specific scaffolds  

<table><tr><td>Tissue</td><td>Scaffolds utilized</td></tr><tr><td>Cardiac tissue</td><td>Polyglycolic acid (PGA), poly-L-lactic acid (PLLA), poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA), polyurethane [7]</td></tr><tr><td>Liver tissue</td><td>Alginate beads encapsulating inducible pluripotent stem cells encapsulated with human hepatic stellate cells, synthetic polymers (polylactide-co-glycolide, polyethylene glycol (PEG), and polycaprolactone), and naturally derived hydrogels (alginates, celluloses, polyethylene) [8]</td></tr><tr><td>Skin</td><td>Human dermal fibroblasts, foreskin-derived keratinocytes, keratinocyte stem cells, hair follicle stem cells, angiogenic endothelial progenitor cells, bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells, and adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells [9]</td></tr><tr><td>Cartilage</td><td>Hydrogel scaffold, solid scaffolds (collagen sponge, decellularized cartilage, small intestinal mucosa), PGA, PEG, hyaluronic acid, chitosan, cellulose [10, 11]</td></tr><tr><td>Bone</td><td>Hydroxyapatite, PLGA, calcium phosphate, PLA, gelatine, chitosan, collagen, PLLA, hydrogels [12]</td></tr><tr><td>Pancreatic tissue</td><td>Collagen, gelatin, fibrin, agarose, alginate, silk, PLA, PGA, PLGA copolymers, polycaprolactone [13]</td></tr><tr><td>Vascular tissue</td><td>Polyethylene terephthalate (PTFE), PGA, polycaprolactone, PLLA, decellularized xenogenic tissue [6]</td></tr><tr><td>Neural tissue</td><td>Natural polymers: Collagen, alginate, chitosan, silk, elastin, hyaluronic acid, keratin
Synthetic polymers: PLA, PGA, PGLA, PEG, poly(2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate)
Electrically conductive polymers: Polypyrrole in combination with other biodegradable synthetic polymers, polyaniline, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiopene) (PEDOT), indium phosphide nanowire scaffold
Carbon-based nanomaterials: Graphene, carbon nanotubes [14]</td></tr></table> towards mature and functional tissue and organs that are capable of implantation in the body to perform the necessary functions. Despite extensive research over the past several decades, developing clinically conformant and functionally stable TE products is still a huge challenge. Mimicking the natural properties of the biological extracellular matrix (ECM) in terms of structure and function requires nano-level precision in the design and fabrication of TE scaffolds. Nanotechnology has the potential to solve this problem by engineering customized nanoparticles and their integration with TE systems.

So far, nanoparticles have found numerous applications in the biomedical field, including bioimaging, drug delivery, vaccine adjuvants, biosensors, photothermal ablation of cells, and gene delivery, with TE being the most recent one. With this wide applicability, nanomaterials have proven therapeutic potential for the treatment of diabetes, magnetic hyperthermia for cancer therapy, inflammation, infection, and so on. The nano-dimensional structure of nanomaterials renders them with unique physico-chemical characteristics, making them promising candidates for a wide range of such applications. The first and foremost is the biomimetic property of nanoparticles with the native nanoscale ECM components of tissues, making them promising candidates for TE applications. The small size and corresponding large surface area to volume ratio, comparable to the small biomolecules, offers another significant advantage to nanoparticles in TE. This makes them easily diffusible across membranes and barriers in the body and uptake by cells. They are also tunable in terms of shape, size, and composition to suit the target application. Additionally, limitations of biomolecule reagents such as low solubility, high expenses, and short half-life (of growth factors, drugs, etc.) have further provoked investigations around the use of nanoparticles as most suitable candidates for drug delivery applications.

Taking advantage of their similarity to natural ECM components, scientists are extensively exploring the integration of nanoparticles to TE scaffolds. Several studies have reportedly conjugated nanoparticles of different compositions either inside the scaffolds as a part of the synthesis process or coated them onto the surface of the scaffolds in order to improve their mechanical and/or biological responses. Among these, the antimicrobial role of silver, conduction of gold nanoparticles, fluorescence of quantum dots, and electromechanical properties of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene oxides are most popular. In addition, several nanoparticles when integrated within the 3D scaffolds lead to guided cellular responses by regulating the shape and morphology of cultured cells, provide mechano-transductional cues, facilitate improved interaction with the biological fluids, and lead to guided differentiation of cell laden constructs into functional 3D tissues. The physical and chemical properties of NPs based on metal oxides, such as the shape, hydrodynamic size, surface roughness, and zeta potential, dictate their interaction with biological systems.

Here we give an overview of the different nanoparticles used for a range of TE applications. Their applications are mainly an outcome of the specific intrinsic properties of each of the nanomaterials that tends to dictate their unique functions.

# 3.1 Desirable Properties of Nanoparticles

Along with nanoparticles, other products of nanotechnology that have profound applications in TE for modulating cell behavior include nanofibers and nanopatterns. Other uses include, but are not limited to, their therapeutic potential and contrasting agent property, incorporation in novel biomaterials (either in bulk material or as surface coating) with precise spatiotemporal control, and controlled release as bioactive agents for drug delivery, especially directing growth factors to regulate stem cell fate, regulating mechano-transductional behavior of scaffolds to direct stem cell fate and morphogenesis, and encompassing superior mechanical strength to the scaffolds for TE applications, along with enhancing biocompatibility. Some of the applications are discussed below.

(a) Improving cellular responses: Nanoparticles, both inorganic and living systems (like viruses), fall under this category. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) of two different dimensions (4 and  $40~\mathrm{nm}$ ) were compared in terms of the differentiation rate of human bone marrow stem cells (hBM-MSCs) [15]. The smaller sized AuNPs promoted adipogenic lineage in seeded hBM-MSCs, while suppressing osteogenic differentiation which is attributed to ROS production in AuNPs, albeit only in smaller size.  $\mathrm{TiO_2}$  nanotubes with slightly higher dimensions (70 nm) were found to be ideal for osteogenic induction of hASCs exploiting epigenetic mechanisms for stem cell modulation. The process was mediated by increased methylation in the promoter regions of two osteo-specific genes, OCN and RUNX2 [16], along with inhibition of demethylase retinoblastoma binding protein 2.  $\mathrm{TiO_2}$  nanotubes (15–30 nm) and associated modifications  $(\mathrm{TiO_2 - NH_2}, \mathrm{TiO_2 - COOH},$  and  $\mathrm{TiO_2 - PEG})$  [17] promote high cell adhesion by increased production of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), which in turn increases osteogenic differentiation of seeded BM-MSCs [18], hASCs [16], and AD-MSCs [19]. Many plants and phage-based viral nanoparticles like unmodified TMV nanoparticles can trigger osteogenic commitment in stem cells, drawback being their lesser affinity towards mammalian cells [20]. TMV nanoparticles coupled with azide-derivatized Arg-Gly-Asp-(RGD) sequence with tyrosine residues decorated on the scaffold increased cell adhesion on material surface. With added advantage of economic viability, inability to infect mammalian cells, tunable geometry and chemistry, and uniform sizes, plant viral nanoparticles have seen an upsurge in biomedical applications.

(b) Improving mechanical properties: Scaffolds either in the form of nanoparticle-embedded polymers (hydrogels, electrospun fibers) or nanoparticle reinforcements or surface coatings have been implemented in TE. Surface modification of a 3D porous poly(lactic acid) (PLA) scaffold was carried out using hydroxyapatite nanoparticles (nHA) by ultrasonication to fabricate nHA-modified PLA/HA scaffold. Strong interfacial adhesion occurring between the nHA and the PLA matrix resulted in  $\sim 3$  times higher compressive modulus and compressive strength and hydrophilicity in the PLA/HA scaffolds than PLA scaffolds alone, resulting in improved cytocompatibility of cultured mouse embryonic osteoblasts cells (MC3T3-E1) [21]. In another study, nHA loaded bio-nanocomposites were developed with various weight fractions of copper oxide nanoparticles (CuONPs), coated with gelatin-coated ibuprofen [22]. The mechanical properties including fracture toughness  $(0.65 - 0.80\mathrm{MPa}\mathrm{m}^{1 / 2})$ , compressive strength  $(1.25 - 0.90\mathrm{MPa})$ , and electrical conductivity  $(2 - 3\mathrm{eV})$  of nHA-CuO composites corresponded to the weight fractions of the CuO NPs added.

(c) Imparting Antimicrobial behavior: Nanoparticles present a suitable alternative to antimicrobial agents, especially oxides of silver (Ag), copper (Cu), and titanium (Ti). Apart from antimicrobial activity, their applications further extend towards the food industry, water purification, and textile [23]. In terms of antimicrobial properties, AgNPs are a safe choice with unprecedented literature available [24]. The NPs, typically ranging from 1 to  $10\mathrm{nm}$ , get attached to the cell membrane compromising the permeability and respiratory functions, followed by penetration inside the bacteria and introducing damage by releasing silver ions. The dimensions of the Ag NPs are critical determinants in the target population, i.e., gram-positive or gram-negative bacteria [25]. Katas et al. [26] proposed a simple, cost-effective, and environment-friendly method of producing spherical AuNPs in the range of  $49 - 82\mathrm{nm}$  with effective antibacterial properties biosynthesized from Lignosus rhinocerotis sclerotial extract (LRE) and chitosan [27]. However, in-depth research is needed in the area in light of recent findings that have raised concerns about their possible toxicity in humans, demanding more background search on nanotoxicology.

(d) Electrical conductivity: Incorporation of nanoparticles that impart electrical conductivity to scaffolds can be highly beneficial to cardiac tissues such as in the treatment of myocardial infarction. Soft hydrogels such as fibrous decellularized matrices incorporated with AuNPs exhibited improved morphology of cardiac cells, striation behavior, and increased expression of electrical coupling proteins [28]. Bone scaffolds have been formulated with electrical conductivity to accelerate the behavior of MSCs towards osteogenic lineage.

(e) Gene delivery: Therapeutic usage of nucleic acids or oligonucleotides for disease treatment is restricted due to their low cell transfection efficiency, poor permeability of the plasma membrane, and relatively rapid degradation in vivo, hence requiring non-viral strategies. Conjugating magnetic nanoparticles with gene vectors enhanced the process of gene transfer under the influence of a magnetic field [29]. For instance, peptide-conjugated iron oxide  $\left(\mathrm{Fe}_{3} \mathrm{O}_{4}\right)$  nanoparticles reportedly exhibited improved efficiency of cellular uptake in lung cancer cells after activation, under the effect of an alternate magnetic field [30]. A recent application of nanoparticles in gene delivery is the use of cellpenetrating peptides (CPPs,  $\sim 30$  amino acids long) as non-viral vectors. CPPs form stable complexes with oligonucleotides, can carry multiple peptides, facilitate delivery of gene therapeutic agents, and are able to translocate via cellular plasma membranes.  $\mathrm{Fe}_{3} \mathrm{O}_{4}$  NPs (6.4 nm in dimensions) were able to form stable complex with CPPs and showed superior transfection efficiency ( $>5$  fold) than commercial vector called LipofectamineTM2000 [31].

(f) Constructing 3D tissues: Taking cues from the nanoscale dimensions of tissue ECM, nanotechnology has profound applications across TE field. Recent literature has reported manipulation and control over cellular functions such as cell adhesion, migration, and morphogenesis using nanoscale materials. Several nanomaterials have been fabricated into 3D structures and used as TE constructs for skin, bone, cartilage, and muscles. Additionally, MNPs due to their exceptional properties and dimensions (up to  $300\mathrm{nm}$ ) have been found to support thermal fluctuations in biological microenvironments. Magnetic labeling of cells using MNPs renders precise control over cell functions and movements by application of an external magnetic field for guided organ regeneration, a process often referred to as magnetic force-based tissue engineering. Table 4 shows various types of nanomaterials and their potential applications in TE.

# 3.2 Application of Nanomaterials in TE

It is well known that the need for tissue regeneration and organ transplantation is increasing due to limited donor availability. In order to compensate for this need, organ-assisted medical devices that mimic the functions of organs have been

Table 4 Nanobiomaterials and their potential applications in TE  

<table><tr><td>Nanomaterials</td><td>Applications</td><td>References</td></tr><tr><td>Gold nanorods</td><td>Chemical and biological sensing resolution</td><td>[36]</td></tr><tr><td>Gold nanowires</td><td>Alginate scaffold for cardiac patches</td><td>[37]</td></tr><tr><td>Silver nanoparticles</td><td>Wound healing, enhanced antibacterial activity</td><td>[38]</td></tr><tr><td>Carbon nanotubes (CNT)</td><td>Coating over bone scaffolds for improved mechanical strength</td><td>[39]</td></tr><tr><td>CNT</td><td>Neural tissue regeneration to promote growth, cell differentiation, cell attachment, long-term survival</td><td>[40, 41]</td></tr><tr><td>Alumina and titania nanopowder</td><td>Bone regeneration for enhanced osteoblast adhesion</td><td>[42]</td></tr><tr><td>Nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite (HA) in PLLA</td><td>Osteoblast growth and mineralization</td><td>[43]</td></tr></table> explored. Nanomaterial-based fabricated systems is one of the potential candidates that mimics the indigenous tissue constituents that can effectively help in replicating in vitro 3D models as well as successful biomedical devices for in vivo testing applications.

# 3.2.1 Bone TE

At the level of micrometer scale, bone has an inner spongy architecture possessing high porosity with an outer layer of lamellar bone comprising compact cylindrical osteons. At the nanometer scale, bone has ordered and aligned pattern of collagen fibrils and hydroxyapatite. In the musculoskeletal system, various tissues, which fall under the category of soft and hard tissues, are connected to one another [32]. Therefore, the structure and physico-chemical properties of a scaffold are crucial to consider when fabricating a substitute for composite tissues, like osteochondral grafts. Conventional approaches for the fabrication of porous composites includes freeze-drying and freeze-gelation methods. The technique has been used to develop porous chitosan-gelatin composites, in previous studies. Both methods have demonstrated remarkable biocompatibility, in terms of the attachment, long-term viability, and differentiation of several cell types, such as nucleus pulposus cells of the human intervertebral disk [33].

# 3.2.2 Cartilage TE

Cartilage, at the ultrastructural level, comprises a dense ECM network of elastin fibers, collagen type II, and proteoglycans. Typically, cartilage is avascularized, porous, non-homogeneous, and viscoelastic tissue with embedded chondrocytes [34]. Synthesis methods have been employed for the generation of materials for cartilage tissue engineering, such as rapid prototyping, micromachining, electros pinning, photolithography, fiber bonding, electrostatic spray deposition, plasma deposition, and molecular self-assembly, with varying degrees of success [35].

# 3.3 Nanomaterials and Stem Cell Interaction

Stem cells are pluripotent cells having an inherent capacity of self-renewal and differentiation into multiple cell lineages [44]. Depending upon the source, stem cells are primarily classified into three categories: embryonic stem cells (ESCs), adult stem cells (ASCs), and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). ESCs, harvested from the inner mass of the blastocyst, possess unlimited potential of self-renewal and hence ideal for regenerative medicine [45]. ASCs have self-renewal capacity, but limited differentiation potential, and are found throughout the body post-development [46]. However, use of ESCs is associated with ethical problems. Another type of stem cells called iPSCs were produced by inducing programming in somatic cells. iPSCs can be generated using different transcription factors and growth factors [47]. In the present day, nanomaterials are extensively used in the induction of cellular programming. However, generating iPSCs are associated with many challenges, which include but are not limited to controlled self-renewal capacity, rapid proliferation, and precisely regulated differentiation.

Over the past few decades, a series of multifunctional nanomaterials have been developed and investigated for stem cell-based therapy applications. However, most studies have focused on the fabrication of novel nanomaterials for therapy and imaging [48, 49], but the underlying mechanism of interaction between nanomaterials and stem cells is not well understood. Due to smaller size and bioactive characteristics, nanomaterials have the potential to affect the stem cell functions in the absence of inductive agents [46]. For instance, aqueous suspension of nanoparticles (silicate nanoparticles, CNTs, and AuNPs) has been reported to promote the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) towards osteogenic lineage [50, 51]. Table 5 illustrates the nanomaterial-mediated stem cell differentiation. Different nanomaterials trigger different signaling pathways for differentiation of stem cells. Hence, it is very crucial to investigate the underlying mechanisms involved in the interaction between the stem cells and nanomaterials, specifically the differentiation capability of the cells influenced by nanomaterials.

Cell membrane plays a pivotal role in the interaction of nanoparticles. Nanoparticles can easily cross the cell membranes through diffusion/receptor-mediated endocytosis and be distributed in the cytoplasm, endosomes, or lysosomes, thus affecting certain signaling pathways responsible for induction or inhibition of cellular differentiation [64]. Receptor-mediated endocytosis includes clathrin-mediated, caveolin-mediated endocytosis and micropinocytosis, and clathrin and caveolin independent endocytosis [65, 66]. Internalization of nanoparticles and their possible mode of mechanism of differentiation are significantly affected by the physico-chemical properties of nanoparticles, such as size, shape, hydrophobicity, composition, and surface chemistry of nanoparticles [46].

Table 5 Nanobiomaterial-based stem cell differentiation  

<table><tr><td>Category</td><td>Nanomaterials used</td><td>Cell type used</td><td>Differentiation specification (Osteogenic differentiation: OD, adipogenic: AD, chondrogenic: CD, neurogenic: ND)</td><td>References</td></tr><tr><td>Polymeric</td><td>PLGA-BSA</td><td>MSCs</td><td>OD preferred 
AD was impaired</td><td>[51]</td></tr><tr><td>Ceramic</td><td>HAP NPs (20 nm)</td><td>MSCs, ADSCs</td><td>OD</td><td>[49]</td></tr><tr><td>Ceramic</td><td>Nanosilicates</td><td>MSCs</td><td>OD</td><td>[52]</td></tr><tr><td>Carbon</td><td>SWCNTs</td><td>MSCs</td><td>OD, AD, CD</td><td>[53]</td></tr><tr><td>Carbon</td><td>SWCNTs</td><td>MSCs</td><td>ND</td><td>[54]</td></tr><tr><td>Carbon</td><td>MWCNTs</td><td>PC12</td><td>AD preferred 
Inhibited OD</td><td>[55]</td></tr><tr><td>Carbon</td><td>rGO nanosheets</td><td>MSCs</td><td>OD</td><td>[56]</td></tr><tr><td>Metal/ metal oxide</td><td>Citrate-AuNPs</td><td>Human fetal neural stem cells (hfNSCs)</td><td>OD preferred 
Inhibited AD</td><td>[57]</td></tr><tr><td>Metal/ metal oxide</td><td>Chitosan-AuNPs</td><td>MSCs</td><td>OD</td><td>[58]</td></tr><tr><td>Metal/ metal oxide</td><td>BSA-AuNPs</td><td>MSCs</td><td>OD</td><td>[59]</td></tr><tr><td>Metal/ metal oxide</td><td>BSA coated gold nanorods (70 nm)</td><td>MSCs</td><td>OD</td><td>[59]</td></tr><tr><td>Metal/ metal oxide</td><td>PEG-AuNPs (40 nm)</td><td>MSCs</td><td>OD</td><td>[60]</td></tr><tr><td>Metal/ metal oxide</td><td>PEG-AuNPs (4 nm)</td><td>MSCs</td><td>AD preferred 
OD inhibited</td><td>[60]</td></tr><tr><td>Metal/ metal oxide</td><td>AgNPs</td><td>Urine-derived stem cells</td><td>OD</td><td>[61]</td></tr><tr><td>Metal/ metal oxide</td><td>TiO2-NPs</td><td>MSCs</td><td>ND</td><td>[62]</td></tr><tr><td>Metal/ metal oxide</td><td>CeO2 NPs (40, 60 nm)</td><td>Osteoblasts</td><td>Accelerated adipogenic trans-differentiation</td><td>[63]</td></tr></table>

Abbreviations: SWCNTs single-walled carbon nanotubes, MWCNTs multi-walled carbon nanotubes, rGO reduced graphene oxide, BSA bovine serum albumin

Nanoparticles in the size range of  $20 - 70\mathrm{nm}$  are considered optimal for stem cell differentiation due to the size-dependent cellular uptake [60, 67]. Higher amount of cellular uptake has occurred in  $30 - 50\mathrm{nm}$  size range, while nanoparticles in the range of  $50 - 200\mathrm{nm}$  have minor effect on cellular uptake [60]. Cellular uptake is also affected by the shape of the nanoparticles [67]. Nanospheres are internalized by the cells at a much higher rate as compared to nanorods or quasi-ellipsoid of similar size [68, 69]. The rate of NP uptake by MSCs decreases as the aspect ratio increases (polar axis: equatorial axis). Furthermore, cellular uptake is also affected by the charge and functional groups present on the surface of nanoparticles. Positively charged nanoparticles showed higher rate of internalization and higher cytotoxicity. Besides these factors, hydrophobicity and the mechanical properties of nanoparti cles could also affect the stem cell behavior [70]. The less stiffer and more hydrophobic nanoparticles have higher cellular uptake. The hydrophobic surface of the nanoparticle plays a critical role in modulating their interaction with the cellular microenvironment, including proteins, lipid membranes, and intracellular uptake rate. Research has shown that hydrophobic nanoparticles, synthesized from poly(n-butyl methacrylate) (PBMA), poly(hexyl methacrylate) (PHMA), and poly(lauryl methacrylate) (PLMA), have higher rate of cellular uptake as compared to the hydrophilic nanoparticles of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), poly(propyl methacrylate) (PPMA), and poly(stearyl methacrylate) (PSMA) nature [70]. However, the underlying mechanism responsible for the enhanced cellular uptake by such less stiff nanoparticles is still unclear. One possible explanation could be that the softer nanoparticles deform easily to enable cellular interactions; however, exact mechanism remains unclear.

In recent years, studies have discussed about the effect of nanomaterials on the differentiation capacity of stem cells [46]. Indeed, nanomaterials have been characterized as a new set of differentiation activators which operate via several pathways, with oxidative stress being one of them [71]. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a common by-product of nanomaterial exposure to cells. Recent studies have shown that ROS significantly influenced the cell differentiation process. Research by Su et al. showed that ROS-mediated p38/MAPK-dependent pathway played a key role in the differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells [72]. In contrast, another study by Mody et al. demonstrated the differentiation of bone pre-osteoblast cells (MC3T3-E1) was inhibited by ROS [73]. These studies suggest that the modulation in the levels of ROS generation are general regulators for stem cell differentiation mechanism, nevertheless, lineage-specific differentiation needs to be further explored. For instance, high ROS level will propel the cell into adipogenesis lineage while impede osteogenesis of stem cells [59].

Mechanical stress is another factor that can play an important role in modulating the differentiation potential of stem cells. The mechanical properties of the cell and cytoskeleton may change due to intracellular accumulation of nanomaterials [74]. Higher mechanical properties have previously been related to increased osteogenic differentiation while inhibiting adipogenic differentiation in progenitor cells [75]. The accumulated intracellular nanomaterials will influence the assembly of cytoskeletons and increase the Young's modulus of stem cells, thereby enhancing the osteogenic differentiation [59].

Nanomaterials interact with cell membrane receptors and are internalized by the cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis. This is followed by packing of these nanomaterials into vesicles and their transportation inside the cells. This is a dynamic process as the nanomaterials are in constant motion inside the cells and interact with the intracellular microenvironment. Nanomaterials interact with various biomolecules that may trigger intracellular signaling pathways to induce the specific differentiation of stem cells [76]. Additionally, protein adsorption on the surface of nanomaterials and cytotoxic behavior induced by the concentration, shape, and size of nanomaterials may play a significant role in influencing the final fate of the stem cells. Extensive research is required to recapitulate conditions similar to in vivo microenvironment using nanomaterials for promoting stem cell-specific differentiation to cater to individual tissues or organs.

# 4 Conclusion

Taken together, the field of nanotechnology has provided a better modality of fabricating biomimetic constructs with more satisfactory reconstruction of patient tissues and organs, both esthetically and in terms of functional rehabilitation. The stem cells of the host tissue or autologous cells incorporated along with the constructs presumably help in a more rapid and effective regeneration process by enhanced cell-matrix interactions. However there is enormous scope for further progress in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine on the design and manufacturing of traditional biomaterials to deliver more patient-specific and patient-friendly approaches. The boost in nanotechnology should ensure precisely engineered nano-architectures more closely replicating the structural, physico-mechanical, and biological aspects of human tissues. In parallel, ongoing research is focussed towards investigating ex vivo methods to design nano surfaces that can more efficiently promote biocompatibility for cell and tissue integration. The conjugation of AuNPs for enhanced cellular adhesion and electrical conductivity in cardiac tissues, protein conjugated  $\mathrm{Fe}_3\mathrm{O}_4$  nanoparticles to increase cellular uptake or addition of nHA to polymers to increase the mechanical properties of orthopedic implants will help in guided tissue responses by activating signaling cascades that direct cellular interactions in situ, are some specific examples highlighting the role of nanomaterials. In addition to this, bringing together teams of biomedical scientists, engineers, clinicians, and focussed patient groups is extremely critical for efficient development of biomedical materials to push them closer towards commercialization.

Acknowledgment Swati Midha is supported by Department of Science and Technology (DST) Inspire Faculty Grant (DST/INSPIRE/04/2017/000645).

# References

1. Ochs MW. Alveolar cleft bone grafting (part II): secondary bone grafting. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 1996;54:83-8.  
2. Aghaloo TL, Moy PK. Which hard tissue augmentation techniques are the most successful in furnishing bony support for implant placement? Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants. 2007;22(Suppl):49-70.  
3. Strietzel FP. Tissue-engineered bone for lateral alveolar ridge augmentation: a case report. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants. 2006;21:131-5.  
4. Lieberman JR, Daluiski A, Einhorn TA. The role of growth factors in the repair of bone. Biology and clinical applications. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2002;84-A:1032-44.  
5. Pradel W, Tausche E, Gollogly J, Lauer G. Spontaneous tooth eruption after alveolar cleft osteoplasty using tissue-engineered bone: a case report. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2008;105:440-4.

6. Song HHG, Rumma RT, Ozaki CK, Edelman ER, Chen CS. Vascular tissue engineering: progress, challenges, and clinical promise. Cell Stem Cell. 2018;22(3):340-54.  
7. Rodrigues ICP, Kaasi A, Filho RM, Jardini AL, Gabriel LP. Cardiac tissue engineering: current state-of-the-art materials, cells and tissue formation. Einstein (Sao Paulo). 2018;16(3):eRB4538.  
8. Mazza G, Al-Akkad W, Rombouts K, Pinzani M. Liver tissue engineering: from implantable tissue to whole organ engineering. Hepatol Commun. 2018;2(2):131-41.  
9. Vig K, Chaudhari A, Tripathi S, Dixit S, Sahu R, Pillai S, Dennis VA, Singh SR. Advances in skin regeneration using tissue engineering. Int J Mol Sci. 2017;18(4):789.  
10. Liu Y, Zhou G, Cao Y. Recent progress in cartilage tissue engineering—our experience and future directions. Engineering. 2017;3(1):28-35.  
11. Vinatier C, Guicheux J. Cartilage tissue engineering: from biomaterials and stem cells to osteoarthritis treatments. Ann Phys Rehabil Med. 2016;59(3):139-44.  
12. Amini AR, Laurencin CT, Nukavarapu SP. Bone tissue engineering: recent advances and challenges. Crit Rev Biomed Eng. 2012;40(5):363-408.  
13. Kumar N, Joisher H, Ganguly A. Polymeric scaffolds for pancreatic tissue engineering: a review. Rev Diabet Stud. 2017;14(4):334-53.  
14. Boni R, Ali A, Shavandi A, Clarkson AN. Current and novel polymeric biomaterials for neural tissue engineering. J Biomed Sci. 2018;25(1):90.  
15. Dayem AA, Choi HY, Yang GM, Kim K, Saha SK, Kim JH, et al. The potential of nanoparticles in stem cell differentiation and further therapeutic applications. Biotechnol J. 2016;11:1550-60.  
16. Lv L, Liu Y, Zhang P, Zhang X, Liu J, Chen T, et al. The nanoscale geometry of TiO2 nanotubes influences the osteogenic differentiation of human adipose-derived stem cells by modulating H3K4 trimethylation. Biomaterials. 2015;39:193-205.  
17. Shrestha S, Mao Z, Fedutik Y, Gao C. Influence of titanium dioxide nanorods with different surface chemistry on the differentiation of rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells. J Mater Chem B. 2016;4:6955-66.  
18. Vercellino M, Ceccarelli G, Cristofaro F, Balli M, Bertoglio F, Bruni G, et al. Nanostructured TiO2 surfaces promote human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells differentiation to osteoblasts. Nanomaterials. 2016;6:124.  
19. Pozio A, Palmieri A, Girardi A, Cura F, Carinci F. Titanium nanotubes stimulate osteoblast differentiation of stem cells from pulp and adipose tissue. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2012;9:S169.  
20. Raja IS, Kim C, Song S-J, Shin YC, Kang MS, Hyon S-H, et al. Virus-incorporated biomimetic nanocomposites for tissue regeneration. Nanomaterials. 2019;9:1014.  
21. Si J, Lin J, Su C, Yu S, Cui Z, Wang Q, et al. Ultrasonication-induced modification of hydroxyapatite nanoparticles onto a 3D porous poly (lactic acid) scaffold with improved mechanical properties and biocompatibility. Macromol Mater Eng. 2019;304:1900081.  
22. Sahmani S, Shahali M, Nejad MG, Khandan A, Aghdam M, Saber-Samandari S. Effect of copper oxide nanoparticles on electrical conductivity and cell viability of calcium phosphate scaffolds with improved mechanical strength for bone tissue engineering. Eur Phys J Plus. 2019;134:7.  
23. Vega-Jimenez AL, Vázquez-Olmos AR, Acosta-Gó E, Álvarez-Pérez MA. In vitro antimicrobial activity evaluation of metal oxide nanoparticles. In: Nanoemulsions-properties, fabrications and applications. London: IntechOpen; 2019.  
24. Morones JR, Elechiguerra JL, Camacho A, Holt K, Kouri JB, Ramirez JT, et al. The bactericidal effect of silver nanoparticles. Nanotechnology. 2005;16:2346.  
25. Pandey A, Midha S, Sharma RK, Maurya R, Nigam VK, Ghosh S, et al. Antioxidant and antibacterial hydroxyapatite-based biocomposite for orthopedic applications. Mater Sci Eng C. 2018;88:13-24.  
26. Gurunathan S, Han JW, Kwon D-N, Kim J-H. Enhanced antibacterial and anti-biofilm activities of silver nanoparticles against Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2014;9:373.

27. Katas H, Lim CS, Azlan AYHN, Buang F, Busra MFM. Antibacterial activity of biosynthesized gold nanoparticles using biomolecules from Lignosus rhinocerotis and chitosan. Saudi Pharm J. 2019;27:283-92.  
28. Shevach M, Fleischer S, Shapira A, Dvir T. Gold nanoparticle-decellularized matrix hybrids for cardiac tissue engineering. Nano Lett. 2014;14:5792-6.  
29. Plank C, Anton M, Rudolph C, Rosenecker J, Krötz F. Enhancing and targeting nucleic acid delivery by magnetic force. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2003;3:745-58.  
30. Hauser AK, Anderson KW, Hilt JZ. Peptide conjugated magnetic nanoparticles for magnetically mediated energy delivery to lung cancer cells. Nanomedicine. 2016;11:1769-85.  
31. Dowaidar M, Abdelhamid HN, Hallbrink M, Freimann K, Kurrikoff K, Zou X, et al. Magnetic nanoparticle assisted self-assembly of cell penetrating peptides-oligonucleotides complexes for gene delivery. Sci Rep. 2017;7:9159.  
32. Limongi T, Tirinato L, Pagliari F, Giugni A, Allione M, Perozziello G, et al. Fabrication and applications of micro/nanostructured devices for tissue engineering. Nano-Micro Lett. 2016;9:1.  
33. Karimi Z, Ghorbani M, Hashemibeni B, Bahramian H. Evaluation of the proliferation and viability rates of nucleus pulposus cells of human intervertebral disk in fabricated chitosan-gelatin scaffolds by freeze drying and freeze gelation methods. Adv Biomed Res. 2015;4:251.  
34. Camarero-Espinosa S, Rothen-Rutishauser B, Foster EJ, Weder C. Articular cartilage: from formation to tissue engineering. Biomater Sci. 2016;4:734-67.  
35. Santo VE, Gomes ME, Mano JF, Reis RL. From nano-to macro-scale: nanotechnology approaches for spatially controlled delivery of bioactive factors for bone and cartilage engineering. Nanomedicine. 2012;7:1045-66.  
36. Lee K-S, El-Sayed MA. Gold and silver nanoparticles in sensing and imaging: sensitivity of plasmon response to size, shape, and metal composition. J Phys Chem B. 2006;110:19220-5.  
37. Dvir T, Timko BP, Brigham MD, Naik SR, Karajanagi SS, Levy O, et al. Nanowired three-dimensional cardiac patches. Nat Nanotechnol. 2011;6:720-5.  
38. Rujitanaroj P-O, Pimpha N, Supaphol P. Wound-dressing materials with antibacterial activity from electrospun gelatin fiber mats containing silver nanoparticles. Polymer. 2008;49:4723-32.  
39. Yu MF, Files BS, Arepalli S, Ruoff RS. Tensile loading of ropes of single wall carbon nanotubes and their mechanical properties. Phys Rev Lett. 2000;84:5552-5.  
40. Mattson MP, Haddon RC, Rao AM. Molecular functionalization of carbon nanotubes and use as substrates for neuronal growth. J Mol Neurosci. 2000;14:175-82.  
41. Hu H, Ni Y, Montana V, Haddon RC, Parpura V. Chemically functionalized carbon nanotubes as substrates for neuronal growth. Nano Lett. 2004;4:507-11.  
42. Webster TJ, Siegel RW, Bizios R. Osteoblast adhesion on nanophase ceramics. Biomaterials. 1999;20:1221-7.  
43. Kim SS, Park MS, Gwak SJ, Choi CY, Kim BS. Accelerated bonelike apatite growth on porous polymer/ceramic composite scaffolds in vitro. Tissue Eng. 2006;12:2997-3006.  
44. Watt FM, Driskell RR. The therapeutic potential of stem cells. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2010;365:155-63.  
45. Tesar PJ, Chenoweth JG, Brook FA, Davies TJ, Evans EP, Mack DL, et al. New cell lines from mouse epiblast share defining features with human embryonic stem cells. Nature. 2007;448:196-9.  
46. Kerativitayanan P, Carrow JK, Gaharwar AK. Nanomaterials for engineering stem cell responses. Adv Healthcare Mater. 2015;4:1600-27.  
47. Sapsford KE, Algar WR, Berti L, Gemmill KB, Casey BJ, Oh E, et al. Functionalizing nanoparticles with biological molecules: developing chemistries that facilitate nanotechnology. Chem Rev. 2013;113:1904-2074.  
48. Rosi NL, Mirkin CA. Nanostructures in biodiagnostics. Chem Rev. 2005;105:1547-62.  
49. Gaharwar AK, Mihaila SM, Swami A, Patel A, Sant S, Reis RL, et al. Bioactive silicate nanoplatelets for osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells. Adv Mater. 2013;25:3329-36.

50. Namgung S, Baik KY, Park J, Hong S. Controlling the growth and differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells by the arrangement of individual carbon nanotubes. ACS Nano. 2011;5:7383-90.  
51. Baglioni P, Carretti E, Chelazzi D. Nanomaterials in art conservation. Nat Nanotechnol. 2015;10:287-90.  
52. Kim KJ, Joe YA, Kim MK, Lee SJ, Ryu YH, Cho DW, et al. Silica nanoparticles increase human adipose tissue-derived stem cell proliferation through ERK1/2 activation. Int J Nanomed. 2015;10:2261-72.  
53. Tay CY, Gu H, Leong WS, Yu H, Li HQ, Heng BC, et al. Cellular behavior of human mesenchymal stem cells cultured on single-walled carbon nanotube film. Carbon. 2010;48:1095-104.  
54. Meng L, Chen R, Jiang A, Wang L, Wang P, Li CZ, et al. Short multiwall carbon nanotubes promote neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells via up-regulation of the neurotrophin signaling pathway. Small. 2013;9:1786-98.  
55. Akhavan O, Ghaderi E, Akhavan A. Size-dependent genotoxicity of graphene nanoplatelets in human stem cells. Biomaterials. 2012;33:8017-25.  
56. Akhavan O, Ghaderi E, Emamy H, Akhavan F. Genotoxicity of graphene nanoribbons in human mesenchymal stem cells. Carbon. 2013;54:419-31.  
57. Choi SY, Song MS, Ryu PD, Lam ATN, Joo S-W, Lee SY. Gold nanoparticles promote osteogenic differentiation in human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells through the Wnt/  $\beta$ -catenin signaling pathway. Int J Nanomed. 2015;10:4383.  
58. Ko WK, Heo DN, Moon HJ, Lee SJ, Bae MS, Lee JB, et al. The effect of gold nanoparticle size on osteogenic differentiation of adipose-derived stem cells. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2015;438:68-76.  
59. Li J, Chen Y, Yang Y, Kawazoe N, Chen G. Sub-10 nm gold nanoparticles promote adipogenesis and inhibit osteogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells. J Mater Chem B. 2017;5:1353-62.  
60. Li JJ, Kawazoe N, Chen G. Gold nanoparticles with different charge and moiety induce differential cell response on mesenchymal stem cell osteogenesis. Biomaterials. 2015;54:226-36.  
61. Pauksch L, Rohnke M, Schnettler R, Lips KS. Silver nanoparticles do not alter human osteoclastogenesis but induce cellular uptake. Toxicol Rep. 2014;1:900-8.  
62. Hou Y, Cai K, Li J, Chen X, Lai M, Hu Y, et al. Effects of titanium nanoparticles on adhesion, migration, proliferation, and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. Int J Nanomed. 2013;8:3619.  
63. Rocca A, Mattoli V, Mazzolai B, Ciofani G. Cerium oxide nanoparticles inhibit adipogenesis in rat mesenchymal stem cells: potential therapeutic implications. Pharm Res. 2014;31:2952-62.  
64. Zhao F, Zhao Y, Liu Y, Chang X, Chen C, Zhao Y. Cellular uptake, intracellular trafficking, and cytotoxicity of nanomaterials. Small. 2011;7:1322-37.  
65. Deng J, Zheng H, Zheng X, Yao M, Li Z, Gao C. Gold nanoparticles with surface-anchored chiral poly(acryloyl-L(D)-valine) induce differential response on mesenchymal stem cell osteogenesis. Nano Res. 2016;9:3683-94.  
66. Deng J, Yu D, Gao C. Biological identity of nanomaterials: opportunities and challenges. Sci China Chem. 2013;56:1533-41.  
67. Li J, Li JEJ, Zhang J, Wang X, Kawazoe N, Chen G. Gold nanoparticle size and shape influence on osteogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells. Nanoscale. 2016;8:7992-8007.  
68. Rivera-Gil P, Jimenez de Aberasturi D, Wulf V, Pelaz B, del Pino P, Zhao Y, et al. The challenge to relate the physicochemical properties of colloidal nanoparticles to their cytotoxicity. Acc Chem Res. 2013;46:743-9.  
69. Florez L, Herrmann C, Cramer JM, Hauser CP, Koynov K, Landfester K, et al. How shape influences uptake: interactions of anisotropic polymer nanoparticles and human mesenchymal stem cells. Small. 2012;8:2222-30.  
70. Lorenz S, Hauser CP, Autenrieth B, Weiss CK, Landfester K, Mailander V. The softer and more hydrophobic the better: influence of the side chain of polymethacrylate nanoparticles for cellular uptake. Macromol Biosci. 2010;10:1034-42.  
71. Tsimbouri PM. Adult stem cell responses to nanostimuli. J Funct Biomater. 2015;6:598-622.

72. Su B, Mitra S, Gregg H, Flavahan S, Chotani MA, Clark KR, et al. Redox regulation of vascular smooth muscle cell differentiation. Circ Res. 2001;89:39-46.  
73. Mody N, Parhami F, Sarafian TA, Demer LL. Oxidative stress modulates osteoblastic differentiation of vascular and bone cells. Free Radic Biol Med. 2001;31:509-19.  
74. Ciofani G, Ricotti L, Canale C, D'Alessandro D, Berrettini S, Mazzolai B, et al. Effects of barium titanate nanoparticles on proliferation and differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2013;102:312-20.  
75. Wang X, Hu X, Dulinska-Molak I, Kawazoe N, Yang Y, Chen G. Discriminating the independent influence of cell adhesion and spreading area on stem cell fate determination using micropatterned surfaces. Sci Rep. 2016;6:28708.  
76. Li J, Li X, Zhang J, Kawazoe N, Chen G. Induction of chondrogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells by biomimetic gold nanoparticles with tunable RGD density. Adv Healthcare Mater. 2017;6:1700317.
