---
title: Nanomaterials in Prosthetic Rehabilitation of Maxillofacial Defects
authors:
- Deborah Sybil
- Satyabodh Guttal,
- Swati Midha
journal: Advances in Dental Implantology Using Nanomaterials and Allied Technology
  Applications
year: 2021
pages: 53-76
url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-52207-0_3
publisher: Springer International Publishing
source_file: sybil-2021-nanomaterials-in-prosthetic-rehabilitation-of-maxillofacial-defects.md
chapter_doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52207-0_3
book_title: Advances in Dental Implantology Using Nanomaterials and Allied Technology
  Applications
book_editors:
- R. S. Chaughule
- Rajesh Dashaputra
book_publisher: Springer International Publishing
book_doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-52207-0
book_isbn: '9783030522070'
publication_year: 2021
---
# Nanomaterials in Prosthetic Rehabilitation of Maxillofacial Defects

Deborah Sybil, Satyabodh Guttal, and Swati Midha

Abstract Maxillofacial reconstruction is complicated due to the etiology and nature of the tissue injury. The complexity of the facial structures adds to the difficulty of rehabilitation both functionally and esthetically. Skeletal reconstruction is by far the easiest part of the rehabilitation. Restoration of soft tissues like skin, cartilage, and mucosa without the support of the underlying bony architecture is possible with prosthesis. Silicone is the most commonly used prosthetic material for maxillofacial rehabilitation. Nanomaterials play an important role in bestowing color compatibility and interface stability in the prosthesis.

Keywords Maxillofacial prosthesis  $\cdot$  Nanomaterials  $\cdot$  Orbital defect  $\cdot$  Nasal defect  $\cdot$  Auricular defect  $\cdot$  Maxillofacial reconstruction

# 1 Introduction

The structure of any part of the body corresponds to its function and so is it with the face. This part of the body supports numerous functions such as vision, hearing, breathing, mastication, and speech apart from its esthetic value. Out of the five sense organs that humans have, four are exclusively located in the maxillofacial region. The maxillofacial skeleton is therefore a unique combination of bony architecture. It comprises 14 bones, 6 of which are paired and 2 unpaired [1]. The facial skeleton is universally divided into three parts: the upper face comprising mainly of the forehead, the midface comprising 13 bones, and the lower face comprising the mandible.

Mandible is the largest and the strongest bone of the face and is the only movable bone in the maxillofacial region. It is connected to the rest of the skull by two temporomandibular joints which are unique, as these are the only joints in the body which function exclusively simultaneously. Structurally, mandible is in the shape of a parabola, the vertex of which houses the chin, which is a unique esthetic feature of humans. Like other bones in the body, mandible has a medullary core with a cortical rim but unlike any other bone in the body, maxilla and mandible have multiple sockets in their alveolar processes for teeth. Maxilla is a paired bone and constitutes majority of the midface. Apart from supporting the teeth, which occlude with those in the mandible, maxilla forms part of the palate, lower part of the nose, and supports the eye. It houses the maxillary sinus which is an air-filled cavity within bone, and humidifies inhaled air, lightens the skull, adds resonance to voice, and produces protective mucus. The zygomatic buttress of maxilla is a thick extension of dense bone from maxilla towards zygomatic bone, the main function of which is to transmit occlusal forces to the cranium.

Various conditions affect the maxillofacial skeleton ranging from infections to malignancies. A list of the most common conditions affecting maxilla and mandible is given in Table 1. Barring a few such as arthritis, Garre's osteomyelitis, and osteoporosis, almost all of these conditions require one or the other form of surgery. Treatment of these conditions requires surgeries like fracture fixation, cyst enucleation, tumor resection, ankylosis release, contouring, etc. The extent of surgery

Table 1 List of some common conditions affecting maxillofacial skeleton [1]  

<table><tr><td>Infections</td><td>Cysts</td><td>Benign tumors</td><td>Bone lesions</td></tr><tr><td>Osteomyelitis</td><td>Odontogenic cysts</td><td>Odontogenic</td><td>Fibro-osseous lesions</td></tr><tr><td>Suppurative</td><td>Radicular</td><td>tumors</td><td>Paget&#x27;s disease</td></tr><tr><td>Non-suppurative</td><td>OKC</td><td>Ameloblastoma</td><td>Cherubism</td></tr><tr><td>Garre&#x27;s</td><td>Periodontal</td><td>CEOT</td><td>Fibrous dysplasia</td></tr><tr><td>Infantile</td><td>Dentigerous</td><td>AOT</td><td>Ossifying fibroma</td></tr><tr><td>Arthritis</td><td>Calcifying odontogenic ABC</td><td>Non-odontogenic Hemangioma Osteoma Chondroma Fibroma</td><td>Giant cell lesions CGCG Cimento-ossifying lesions</td></tr><tr><td>Malignant tumors</td><td>Congenital</td><td>Others</td><td>Conditions specific to maxillofacial region</td></tr><tr><td>SCC</td><td>Aplasia</td><td>Fracture</td><td>Garre&#x27;s osteomyelitis</td></tr><tr><td>Malignant</td><td>Atresia</td><td>AV malformations</td><td>Cherubism</td></tr><tr><td>odontogenic tumor</td><td>Syndromic</td><td>TMJ ankylosis</td><td>Ameloblastoma</td></tr><tr><td>Osteosarcoma</td><td>hypoplasia</td><td>Osteoradionecrosis</td><td>Dental cysts</td></tr><tr><td>Ewing&#x27;s sarcoma</td><td>Cleft alveolus</td><td>Osteoporosis</td><td>Cemento-ossifying lesions</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Hemifacial microsomia</td><td></td><td>Cleft deformities</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Osteogenesis imperfecta</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

OKC odontogenic keratocyst,  $ABC$  aneurysmal bone cyst,  $CEOT$  calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor,  $AOT$  adenomatoid odontogenic tumor,  $CGCG$  central giant cell granuloma,  $SCC$  squamous cell carcinoma,  $AV$  arteriovenous,  $TMJ$  temporomandibular joint depends on the extent and severity of the condition. Because of the nature of the disease, malignant lesions and certain locally aggressive lesions such as ameloblastoma and odontogenic keratocyst require resection of a rim of normal bone along with the lesional tissue. The residual deformity due to such resections, if not treated, can cause serious esthetic and functional problems. Reconstruction of the defects caused by jaw lesions and related surgeries may be done immediately or as a second stage procedure but has to be definitely addressed if one wishes to provide an acceptable quality of life to the patient.

# 2 History of Maxillofacial Skeletal Reconstruction

Most of the walled defects of the jaws such as bony cavities secondary to cyst enucleation heal physiologically. Larger defects of this kind may need particulate or granular bone grafts. Alloplastic grafts are osteoconductive which means that these grafts act as a scaffold for new bone formation. Osteoinduction is a process where osteogenesis is induced by recruitment and stimulation of immature cells. Addition of growth factors into alloplastic materials makes them osteoinductive. These two properties are considered adequate for new bone formation in bony cavities. Therefore, alloplastic grafts alone or in combination with growth factors, are sufficient for large bony cavities where physiologic healing is expected. Table 2 gives a list of grafts currently used in treatment of small defects of the jaws.

Reconstruction of defects secondary to resection is not as simple. Grafts used in such reconstruction must have osteogenic potential which is the ability of a graft to form new bone by the action of vital osteoblasts. For long, the only grafts which had osteogenic potential were autografts. A number of autografts have been used to reconstruct maxilla and mandible along with associated soft tissue (Table 3).

The gold standard of skeletal reconstruction in maxillofacial region is still autogenous bone: vascularized or nonvascularized. Segmental defects of  $4 - 5\mathrm{cm}$  in size can be reconstructed with nonvascularized free bone grafts whereas defects larger than  $5\mathrm{cm}$  require vascularized free flaps. This is because bone remodeling within a graft prerequisites adequate vascular supply especially to the core of the graft. Bone cells within a graft survive on diffusion from the margins during the first 5 days. The central parts of large nonvascularized bone grafts become necrotic and are revascularized within weeks to months depending on the vascularity of the donor site and

Table 2 Grafts currently used for small defects of the jaws [1]  

<table><tr><td>Autogenous corticocancellous grafts</td><td>Commercially available allografts</td><td>Growth factors</td></tr><tr><td>Iliac</td><td>Hydroxyapatite</td><td rowspan="2">Bone morphogenetic protein</td></tr><tr><td>Symphysis</td><td>Tricalcium phosphate</td></tr><tr><td>Tibial head</td><td>Bioactive glass</td><td>Platelet-rich plasma</td></tr><tr><td>Calvarium</td><td>Calcium sulfate</td><td>Platelet-rich fibrin Interferon alpha</td></tr></table>

Table 3 Currently used maxillofacial reconstructive methods [1]  

<table><tr><td>Graft</td><td>History</td><td>Disadvantages</td></tr><tr><td>Local soft tissue flaps</td><td></td><td>Insufficient for large defects
Not applicable for composite defects
Donor site morbidity</td></tr><tr><td>1. Tongue flap</td><td>Guerrero-Santos and Altamirano (1996) [3]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. Masseter flap</td><td>Tiwari (1987) [4]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. Buccal fat pad</td><td>Egyedi (1977) [5]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Regional soft tissue flaps</td><td></td><td>Limited size of graft
Not applicable for composite defects
Donor site morbidity
Compromised esthetics</td></tr><tr><td>1. Nasolabial flap</td><td>Cohen and Edgerton (1971) [6]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. Temporalis flap</td><td>Lentz (1895) [7]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. Forehead flap</td><td>McGregor (1963) [8]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. Deltopectoral flap</td><td>McGregor and Jackson (1970) [9]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Regional composite flaps</td><td></td><td>Limited size of graft
Donor site morbidity
Compromised esthetics
Difficult to adapt to recipient site</td></tr><tr><td>1. Sternocleidomastoid</td><td>Jiano (1908) [10]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. Trapezius flap</td><td>Conley (1972) [11]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. Pectoralis major flap</td><td>Ariyan (1979) [12]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. Platysma flap</td><td>Futrell et al. (1978) [13]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5. Latissimus dorsi flap</td><td>Quillen et al. (1978) [14]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6. Submental flaps</td><td>Martin et al. (1993) [15]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7. Infrahyoid flaps</td><td>Wang et al. (1986) [16]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Free nonvascularized bone grafts</td><td></td><td>Limited size of graft
Necrosis of graft
Donor site morbidity</td></tr><tr><td>1. Iliac crest</td><td>Taylor (1982) [17]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. Rib</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. Calvarium</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Free vascularized grafts</td><td></td><td>Donor site morbidity
Increased intraoperative time
Need for microvascular surgical skills</td></tr><tr><td>1. Fibular grafts</td><td>Ueba and Fujikawa (1983) [18], O&#x27;Brien and Morrison (1987) [19]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. Radial forearm grafts</td><td>Soutar et al. (1983) [20]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. Iliac crest grafts</td><td>Taylor (1982) [17]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. Scapular grafts</td><td>dos Santos (1984) [21]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5. Dorsalis pedis grafts</td><td>McCraw and Furlow (1975) [22]</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Allograft and xenograft</td><td></td><td>Infections
Disease transmission
Immunogenicity</td></tr><tr><td>1. Freeze-dried bone graft</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. Decellularized FDBG</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Implants</td><td></td><td>Inadequate reconstruction
No functional rehabilitation
Implant rejection
Implant breakage or exposure
Impedes growth in children
Allergy</td></tr><tr><td>1. Stainless steel</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. Titanium</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. Vitallium</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. Silicon</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5. Acrylic resins</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table> the structure of the grafted bone. The sources of newly formed bone are perivascular osteoprogenitor cells and undifferentiated mesenchymal cells which enter the graft accompanying the proliferating vessels [2]. However, in vascularized grafts, remodeling takes place across the whole graft at a time and therefore, grafts as large as  $15 - 20\mathrm{cm}$  have high level of viability for the majority of bone forming cells inside the graft survive through the established blood supply. The primary perfusion of the grafted bone also sustains resistance against infections allowing survival of the graft independently from the donor site complications [2]. Because of these considerations, free vascularized bone grafts are currently the most suitable for reconstructing large segmental defects of the jaws.

# 3 Drawbacks in Present Reconstructive Options

The most commonly used vascularized graft for mandibular segmental defects are the fibula and iliac crest. The fibular graft has the advantage of adequate length, good stability, and adaptability to the recipient site. The disadvantages are patient immobility postoperatively, reduced height of graft for dental rehabilitation, and donor site morbidity. The iliac crest is a curved piece of mainly cancellous bone that allows three-dimensional carving into the shape of hemimandible but has the disadvantage of great deal of postoperative pain, gait disturbances, nerve injuries, hernia, and paresthesia [23]. Both the grafts need prolonged intraoperative time to harvest and reshape the bone to adapt to the recipient site and for donor site management. Moreover, such a reconstructive procedure does not completely restore jaw function. Functional dental rehabilitation requires restoration of mandible to near normal which is clinically difficult. Figure 1 shows the inadequacy of a vascularized fibula graft for a hemiman-dibulectomy defect in restoring the height and width of mandible [1].

The inability to replicate complex facial contours is another major drawback. For instance, reconstruction of segmental defects in the anterior mandible is challenging due to the geometry of bone in this region. Restoring its horseshoe shape to achieve proper contour and adequate function with the limitations of autogenous bone grafts is difficult. Figure 2 shows a case of segmental resection in the anterior mandible and the problems associated with its reconstruction [1].


The midface poses a greater challenge because of its intricate anatomy and multiple interlacing and communicating spaces. Before the development of more sophisticated reconstructive techniques, prosthetic appliances were the only modality available to address the functional and esthetic requirements of such a complex defect. Free tissue transfers have made autologous maxillary reconstruction possible but functional and esthetic results are far from optimal.

# 4 Maxillofacial Prosthesis

Maxillofacial prostheses fabricated by a skilled prosthodontist or an anaplastologist provide an unparalleled reproduction of the lost facial form. It is of utmost importance that the prostheses be fabricated with optimal esthetics while maintaining an adequate appearance over its service lifetime. Modern materials for maxillofacial prostheses include vinyl plastisols, polymethylmethacrylates, polyurethanes, latex, and silicone elastomers. Properties like chemical inertness, strength, durability, and ease of manipulation make silicone elastomers the material of choice in maxillofacial prostheses. Silicone elastomers used for the fabrication of maxillofacial prostheses have individual physical and mechanical properties; however, clinical problems such as gradual deterioration of color in a service environment and degradation of physical, static, and dynamic mechanical properties are common for all. In the chemical industry, during the past 10 years, research has been devoted to the development of a new industrial process that incorporates nanoparticles into a polymeric matrix, providing a new class of polymeric materials that offers the strength of nano-oxides, with the flexibility of the organic polymer matrix. The nano-sized material particles result in the optimization of individual material particle characteristics and control of biological, mechanical, electrical, magnetic, and optical characteristics as well. Nano-sized rutile  $\mathrm{TiO}_2$  and  $\mathrm{ZnO}$  are known to have a high ultraviolet (UV) absorbing and scattering effects that result in protection from UV light. Nano-sized  $\mathrm{SiO}_2$ ,  $\mathrm{TiO}_2$ , and  $\mathrm{ZnO}$  are characterized by their small size, large specific area, active function, and strong interfacial interaction with the organic polymer. Therefore, one can improve the physical properties and optical properties of the organic polymer, as well as provide resistance to environmental stress-induced aging. Little has been reported in the literature on how the addition of these particles to a maxillofacial elastomer could affect its properties. Han et al. evaluated the effect of nano-sized oxides of various compositions in different concentration on the mechanical properties of a commercially available silicone elastomer. They determined that incorporation of Ti, Zn, or Ce nano-oxides at a concentration of  $2.0\%$  improved the overall mechanical properties of silicone A-2186 maxillofacial elastomer [24].

# 5 Case Reports

# 5.1 CASE 1: Nasal Prosthesis for a Patient with Mammalian Bite Injury [25]

A 32-year-old male patient reported with destructed nasal cartilage caused by a bear bite injury (Fig. 3a). Composite skin grafting was done in the upper lip and forehead region and a temporary nasal prosthesis was fabricated for the patient post-surgery which was retained with white surgical tape. Various prosthetic treatment modalities ranging from acrylic resin nasal prosthesis to implant-retained silicon prostheses were explained to the patient. The patient chose a spectacle retained nasal prosthesis made of acrylic resin due to economic constraints.

The boundary for the impression was outlined on the face. Light petrolatum was applied on the eyebrows and eyelashes. While taking care not to distort the nasal remnants/tissues by packing moist gauze into the defect, rolled modeling wax was used to confine the impression material. Facial moulage was made using an irreversible hydrocolloid material (Fig. 3b) reinforced with gauze and dental plaster and the impression poured in type III dental stone (Fig. 3c). The wax pattern of the nose with developed esthetic contours was sculpted on the master cast and the

# 5.2 CASE 2: Prosthetic Rehabilitation of a Midfacial Defect Resulting from Lethal Midline Granuloma [26]

A 22-year-old male patient with lethal midline granuloma, presented with severe destruction of midfacial structures including the nose, palate, and the paranasal sinuses along with inflamed right eye and adjacent soft tissues (Fig. 4a). Rehabilitation for both intra-orally with a prosthetic palate and extra-orally with the nasal prosthesis was planned for the patient. However, he only opted for the extra-oral nasal prosthesis for his facial disfigurement and exposed defect. A heat-polymerizing acrylic resin nasal prosthesis was planned. The boundary for the

# 5.3 CASE 3: Orbital Prostheses in Patients with History of Carcinoma [27]

(a) A 45-year-old female patient complained of facial disfigurement due to loss of left eye. A history of carcinoma of the left eye followed by exenteration was recorded. As a result of altered facial esthetics, the patient suffered severe emotional trauma in terms of social acceptance.  
(b) A 58-year-old female patient complained of missing right orbital contents following the surgery due to adenoid cystic carcinoma (Fig. 5a).

Both the patients were seeking an artificial orbital replacement. On examination, there was no anatomical undercut in the defect that could be utilized for retention. A custom-made ocular and orbital prosthesis was planned and the treatment procedure explained to the patient. Identical methods were employed to verify the reliability of the results in both patients.

Impression of the orbital defect was made using irreversible hydrocolloid reinforced with dental plaster and the cast poured in dental stone (Fig. 5b). The stone cast was duplicated with silicone duplicating material in a metal flask. After the duplicating material set, the master cast was separated and stone cast poured in the

# 5.4 CASE 4: Orbital Prosthesis in Patient with Rhabdomyosarcoma [28]

A 45-year-old male patient complained of facial disfigurement due to loss of left eye (Fig. 6a). History revealed exenteration of orbit a year ago for eradication of rhabdomyosarcoma. Extra-oreally, no definite bony or soft tissue undercut to aid in the retention of the prosthesis. After evaluation and inspection of the defect, the iris and pupil diameter were measured using calipers and impression with irreversible hydrocolloid was made reinforced with quick setting dental plaster (Fig. 6b-d). A cast was poured in dental stone type II which was duplicated and modeling wax adapted to fabricate shim (Fig. 6e). This waxed up shim was processed using heat polymerizing clear acrylic resin (Fig. 6f). Measurements were made from the patient's facial midline to the center of the pupil and from the inner canthus of the eye to the nasal bridge (Fig. 6g). The measurements were then transferred on the cast to help in positioning of the orbital prosthesis. A stock ocular prosthesis was selected closely matching the color, size, and shape of the iris and sclera of the other eye. The acrylic shim was exposed only at the bridge of the nose for attachment to the eyeglass frame. The eye was then secured in position on a bed of modeling wax according to the position gained using measurements of the other eye. The anteroposterior position was adjusted and verified on the patient when observed from profile and from the top of the head. Once the position was confirmed, the eyelids and the remaining portion was sculpted in wax (Fig. 6h) and tried in the patient's orbital defect. Consent from the patient regarding the appearance of the prosthesis and prosthesis placed in situ, the glass frame was attached to the acrylic shim with the help of cyanoacrylate resin adhesive. The attachment was reinforced with clear autopolymerizing acrylic resin (Fig. 6).


# 5.5 CASE 5: Implant-Retained Nasal Prosthesis for a Patient Following Partial Rhinectomy [29]

A 58-year-old male patient diagnosed with basal cell carcinoma of the nasal vestibule who had undergone partial rhinectomy, reported with iatrogenic absence of the entire cartilage of the nose, ala, and part of the nasal septum due to the surgery (Fig. 7a). As a bank employee who interacts with customers, the patient was deeply concerned about his esthetics and was seeking prosthetic rehabilitation soon after surgery. Since an immediate definitive prosthesis was not feasible, the patient was temporarily rehabilitated with an acrylic resin nasal prosthesis attached to an eyeglass frame (Fig. 7i). During the subsequent follow-up appointment, it was noted that retention and marginal fit of the temporary prosthesis was lost due to postsurgical marginal tissue changes. At this stage, the option of the implant-retained silicone prosthesis was given. The temporary nasal prosthesis and a clear acrylic resin surgical template with properly angulated pilot holes were used as a guide for the implant placement. Under local anesthesia, a full thickness mucoperiosteal flap was elevated, exposing the anterior border of the nose and the nares. Two implants of  $3.75\mathrm{-mm}$  diameter and  $10\mathrm{-mm}$  length were placed into the anterior maxilla through the nasal fossa on either side of the nasal septum (Fig. 7b, c). The mucoperiosteal flaps were then repositioned and closed with 4-0 VICRYL sutures. 6 months later, a small mucoperiosteal flap was raised, debulking of the soft tissue was performed, and the healing abutments were placed. Three weeks later, the soft tissue edema had subsided, and a peri-implant mucosal seal was observed. The nasal defect was packed with moist gauze to prevent the flow of the impression material and implant components falling into the nasal cavity. Healing abutments were removed, and impression posts were connected to the implants. An impression was made using medium-body vinylpolysiloxane impression material. The impression posts were unthreaded and connected to the laboratory analogs (Fig. 7d). The master cast was then made with dental stone. Pattern resin copings were fabricated on both the ball abutments. Screw channels were made to place the screw that will retain the copings onto the ball abutments (Fig. 7e). Rigid castable bars were attached to the resin copings using inlay wax. The framework included two vertically oriented elements overlying the defect on both sides of the nasal septum and one horizontal bar connecting the implants and resin copings. The casting was done in a semiautomatic two-chambered titanium-casting machine under argon gas pressure. The titanium bar was positioned on the master cast and threaded to the ball abutments. The nasal prosthesis was sculpted in wax on the master cast. Care was taken to avoid any interference to the bar. The morphology and the anatomic contours of the nose were developed according to the patient's own description of his presurgical appearance and also the references given by the patient's immediate circle of relatives. The wax pattern of the prosthesis was hollowed to make space for the acrylic resin substructure, which housed the retentive elements. The bar and the acrylic resin substructure were designed to fit within the confines of the final nasal prosthesis. The ball abutments, along with the titanium framework, were threaded onto the implants (Fig. 7f) and trial placement of the wax pattern of the prosthesis was done. At the time of trial, the fit of the bar, size, contours, and marginal adaptation of the wax pattern of the prosthesis were evaluated and found satisfactory. The titanium framework was repositioned on the master cast, and the borders of the wax pattern were sealed. A dental stone mold was produced in a conventional manner. Mold releasing agent was sprayed after the wax elimination to facilitate the removal of the silicone prosthesis. Primer was applied on the acrylic resin substructure after cleaning with acetone, for mechanical retention of the silicone elastomer. Silicone was packed in layers into the mold, developed with intrinsic color to match the patient's skin tone, and allowed to cure at room temperature. The acrylic resin housing had bonded well to the silicone. Nostrils were cut open in the acrylic resin for air exchange (Fig. 7g). The silicone nasal prosthesis was retrieved and finished. Initial trial was done on the patient to check the color match of the prosthesis. Extrinsic colors were used to match the small-pigmented dots present on the skin (Fig. 7h, j).


# 5.6 CASE 6: Rehabilitation of a Missing Ear with an Implant-Retained Auricular Prosthesis [30]

A 47-year-old male patient reported with facial disfigurement along with the loss of the right ear after severe burn injury to the face (Fig. 8a). The patient was extremely concerned about his facial disfigurement and requested for an economic solution for replacing the missing ear. A thorough evaluation of the affected area, medical history, and physician's consent was taken. External examination revealed scarring of tissue with gross discoloration and complete loss of hearing from the right ear. A dermatologic evaluation was conducted which revealed that the patient had scarred tissue, decreased blood supply to the area, increased contracture formation, and reduced epithelialization and collagen formation. A radiographic evaluation showed suitable bone quality, adequate thickness of the temporal bone, and density of the mastoid air cells to receive implants. Three-dimensional lateral cephalography was recorded of the affected and normal side along with soft tissue reconstruction. A stereolithographic model was obtained of the patient's temporal bone and temporomandibular joint (Fig. 8b). Sites for the placement of implants were located and the medical-grade silicone was packed into the mold and left to cure for  $1\mathrm{h}$  at  $100^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ . The prosthesis was retrieved and finished, and an initial trial was performed. Extrinsic tinting was performed to further blend with the patient's skin tone. The excess silicone was cut out. The lightweight of the prosthesis ensured easy support by the magnets (Fig. 8g).


# 5.7 CASE 7: Rehabilitation of Orbital Defect with Silicone Orbital Prosthesis Retained By Dental Implants [31]

A 27-year-old male complained of facial asymmetry and poor looks due to loss of the right eye. A history of retinoblastoma, followed by exenteration of the orbit was recorded. The surgical intervention had been carried out when the patient was 5 months old, and thereby the growth was retarded. The facial asymmetry was apparent as an ophthalmic defect included the right orbit and extended laterally along the outer canthus of the eye, towards the temporal region as well along the malar eminence towards the zygomatic arch. The patient underwent a CT scan on basis of which a stereolithographic model was fabricated. A mock surgery (Fig. 9a) on the stereolithography model revealed optimal bone thickness along the inferolateral orbital rim composed of zygomatic bone while the lateral aspect of superolateral rim composed of frontal bone showed moderately optimal bone in terms of thickness and density. A surgical stent was fabricated as per the mock preparation. Two intra-oral dental implants were placed depending on the availability of the bone at the defect site under short general anesthesia. A  $3.75\mathrm{mm} \times 10\mathrm{mm}$  implant was placed in inferolateral region and  $3.75\mathrm{mm} \times 8\mathrm{mm}$  implant was placed in superolateral region (Fig. 9b). A healing period of 4 months was given following which the extra-oral radiographs—PA Water's view and lateral cephalogram (Fig. 9c) were made. The defect impression was made with implant components in place (Fig. 9d). A metal framework was cast to attach it to the implant abutment with the magnetic keepers embedded in it (Fig. 9e). The metal framework was threaded onto implant in the patient's defect. The wax orbital prosthesis had the corresponding magnets embedded in it (Fig. 9f). Wax trial was taken (Fig. 9g). Intrinsic coloring was done to blend the silicone with the adjacent skin color. Finally, the silicone orbital prosthesis was placed in-situ (Fig. 9h).

# 6 Role of Nanobiomaterials in Maxillofacial Prosthesis

Maxillofacial rehabilitation by implantation of biocompatible prostheses helps restore the esthetics and functions (such as speaking, eating, and chewing) in patients affected by trauma, congenital defects, or disease-related deformities. Having a proper rehabilitation of the craniofacial region goes a long way in boosting the confidence, social acceptance, and psychological well-being of the individual.

Hence, a key role is played by the structure, properties, and physiological responses of the prosthetics used for reconstructive surgeries.

The upsurge in the field of nanotechnology and tissue engineering has played a major role in medical intervention for adequately fixing cases of maxillofacial reconstruction. By applying nanobiomaterials and/or inducing surface modifications on the prostheses, the challenge is to improve upon the integration, retention, and long-term functionality of the implanted prostheses. In this section, we will elaborate on the application of nanobiomaterials to maxillofacial prostheses in terms of their unique properties, physiological responses within the host, and cellular signaling, all leading to early integration and adequate retention of the implant.

Some key aspects to the application of maxillofacial prostheses that determine the ultimate fate of such implants include:

1. Physiological and cellular changes inside the host upon implantation: Immediately upon implantation of the prosthesis inside the host tissues, a cascade of events is initiated at the implantation site. Blood is usually the first biological fluid that interacts with the biomaterial surface and enables the adsorption of several biologically active molecules (fibronectin) and serum proteins from the in vivo milieu on the material surface. This initial wetting of the material surface, also known as flash spread, is one of the most critical determinants of the performance of the biomaterials. Protein adsorption is accompanied by platelet activation resulting in the formation of clot. This coagulum at the implant surface facilitates further deposition of proteins, releases inflammatory molecules instigating a series of signaling molecules that exert influence on the migration of monocytes, neutrophils (both involved in inflammation), and mesenchymal cells (cells that can differentiate into osteoblasts) towards the implant surface. Following the aggregation of inflammatory mediators, growth factors, and differentiation factors, the process of angiogenesis and tissue regeneration is initiated. For instance, mineralized materials (ceramics) and metals commonly carry a negative charge on their surface under physiological conditions, selectively allowing positively charged biomolecules to adsorb on the surface [32].

2. Surface modification of materials: Various surface modifications like Grit-blasting, acid etching, and sandblasting are promising techniques used to improve the surface interactions of materials with biological moieties. The predominant reason being increase in the surface area, generation of micropores resulting in a roughened or textured surface as compared to the smoothened, machined surfaces. This in turn has a direct impact on the cell attachment and proliferation, which results in increased implant stability. Coating with nanobiomaterials is another promising strategy for improving osteoconductivity. For instance, plasma-sprayed hydroxyapatite (HA) coating is a clinically proven method for increasing the osteoconductivity and promoting early osseointegration in bone implants. In the process, HA particles are blasted on the implant surface at very high temperature range to enhance bone-to-implant contact. However, the irregular HA coating on the implant surface results in nonuniform thickness leading to unpredictable degradation profile in vivo. In addition, nano-crystalline deposition of calcium phosphate and fluoride to titanium surfaces has also been with varying success rates.

# 7 Materials Proposed

The conventional materials proposed for maxillofacial applications face some severe setbacks in terms of biocompatibility, early integration, tear strength, and mechanical properties. Under an ideal scenario, the hunt is on for materials possessing "similar" if not the "same" features to the missing facial tissue to adequately reconstruct a patient's intrinsic esthetic features of mastication, speech resonance, and facial gesture. Nanoparticles have increasingly been exploited in biomedical applications due to their small size, large interface area, interaction with biological tissues, and strong interfacial interaction with the organic polymer. Hollow cores of nanobiomaterials are often loaded as delivery vehicles with drugs for targeted therapy. Some clinically popular materials and their respective modifications with nanobiomaterials are summarized below:

1. Silicon elastomers for maxillofacial prostheses: A documented usage is to develop an improved maxillofacial prosthetic material with optimum mechanical properties. In this context,  $\mathrm{SiO}_2$  is often mixed with silicone elastomers (3% by weight) for maxillofacial applications [33] and boosts the mechanical properties of the resultant composite as compared to 3% wt. of nano-oxides of Ti, Zn, or Ce (non-surface treated) [34]. Nano- $\mathrm{TiO}_2$  powder was applied as a nanofiller. The effect of 0.25 wt% titanium oxide in maxillofacial elastomers, VST50F RTV and Cosmesil M511 HTV showed 1.17-fold and 1.1-fold increase in tear strength of resultant composites [35]. While HTV possesses excellent thermal, color, and chemical stability, prosthetics due to opacity and lesser elastic strength are certain limiting factors. RTV, on the other hand, generates by-products, excessive curing time, easy degradation by hydrolysis, and low tear strength have a negative impact on the long-term retention of the prostheses [36]. Another similar study illustrated that the increase in the mechanical properties of the organic polymer was gradual as the filler concentration increases. Increasing concentration of the nanofiller will apparently result in filler to filler binding, hence taking up small voids in the polymer thereby making it more rigid towards indentation and penetration [37]. Natural nanobiomaterials synthesized from pomegranate peels (0.2% by weight) and dates Ajwa (0.3% by weight) have also been found to significantly improve the mechanical properties of silicone rubber [38].

2. Titanium implants for osseointegration: Titanium implants have constituted an enormous market share over the last many decades in the reconstruction and rehabilitation of bone deformities of the craniofacial region. It is known that early osseointegration is imperative for congruent bone formation and proper integration of implant in the defect site. Osseointegration relies upon surface chemistry and surface topography of the material. Nano-sized particle coating with materials, mostly of ceramic composition, helped such metal implants attain bone-like surface chemistry [39, 40]. Not only in terms of similar composition, but the nano-textured implant surface with roughened morphology coming from the irregular micropores enabled enhanced protein and cellular interactions at the molecular level (increased expression of osteocalcin and collagen type I) [41] between the material and host tissue, ultimately forming strong bonding between the two. In addition, marked reduction in TRAP and TNF- $\alpha$  activity showed a reduced bone turnover rate around the HA-coated implant. A striking contrast was the work of Svanborg et al. who failed to observe any marked differences in the extent of bone formation in HA nano-coated titanium screws over uncoated ones. However, such discrepancies could be attributed to several variables in study parameters such as differences in the implant design, method of evaluation, and surgical technique demonstrated [42].

3. Antimicrobial coatings, dressings, and local carriers: Surface colonization of biomaterials post implantation in vivo could induce an inflammatory reaction and generate an increased risk for mucositis and peri-implantitis [43]. If the bacteria adhere to the implant surface, biofilm formation initiates immediately, leading to the formation of an extremely resistant biofilm within a few hours. Hence, in a way, the fate of the biomaterial is decided at the time of implantation itself. Application of local antibiotic carriers/coatings such as antibiotic-loaded polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), poly-L-lactic acid (PLLA) matrix with gentamicin sulfate, bone grafts, has an initial outburst (nearly  $80\%$  ) of the antibiotic within the first 2 days [44]. More stable coatings, such as silver nano-coatings, form reactive oxygen species, mechanisms that potentially inhibit the growth of prokaryotic cells. A retrospective case-control study reported the results of silver-coated tumor prostheses in 85 patients showed that there was a significant reduction in the overall postoperative infection rate from  $22.4\%$  to  $11.8\%$  in favor of the silver-coated implant group, with a mean reduction of approximately  $48\%$  in infection rate post operations [45].

Irrespective of a wide range of options available for treatment and regeneration of disfigured maxillofacial cases, there is immense room for improvement. Some of these include the fabrication protocol of prostheses, time, effort, cost plus retention, and matching the esthetic complexity. These limitations make access to global patient's community almost denied; only a small number of these patients can get access to this sophisticated device, those who can afford the high cost of the prosthesis, whereas people at the other poor global regions such as Africa and India cannot easily obtain a good prosthesis.

# 8 Advanced Approaches for Maxillofacial Rehabilitation

Despite advances in surgical techniques, a patient undergoing severely debilitating head and neck surgery more than often requires a maxillofacial prosthesis, fabricated to the utmost precision to carry out unhindered day-to-day functioning. Silicone is one of the most preferred elastomer materials for their fabrication owing to its chemical inertness, strength, durability, and ease of manipulation. Despite its commendable properties, it is often seen to deteriorate over a period of functional use, generally 6 months, on grounds of its color stability, thus requiring refabrication. To counter this drawback, nanoparticles have been added to silicone and have shown to improve not only its biological, mechanical, electrical, and magnetic properties, but also enhance the optical properties. A variety of nano-oxides have been tried with to evaluate the best possible outcome. Akash et al., under in-vitro conditions, assessed the effect of titanium oxide  $(\mathrm{TiO}_2)$  with that of zinc oxide  $(\mathrm{ZnO})$  in comparison to no additional incorporation as a control sample. Incorporation of these nano-sized oxides provided with intrinsic coloring ability with least amount of color changes seen with nano-sized  $\mathrm{ZnO}$  [46]. Kiat-amnuay et al. investigated the effect of oil pigments in varying concentrations with opacifiers on color stability of maxillofacial elastomer which was then spectrometrically evaluated before and after artificial aging.  $5\%$ ,  $10\%$ , and  $15\%$  were the different concentrations of the opacifiers used [47]. A total of five opacifiers were tested namely; neutral kaolin powder, calcined kaolin powder, Artkin white, dry pigment Ti white, and Ti white artists' oil color. These were used alone or in combination with cadmium-barium red deep, yellow ochre, burnt sienna, or a mixture of these. Dry Ti pigment showed the most color stable results. In one of the initial attempts, Haug et al. tested the effect of different environmental conditions on the elastomer prosthesis fabricated with and without coloring agent [48]. It was noticed that the silicone material underwent changes and was not as stable as previously thought by the pioneers whether a coloring agent was added or not. However, addition of coloring agent helped protect the prosthesis from varying weather conditions. Inorganic coloring agents such as dry earth pigments, kaolin, artist's oil, and liquid cosmetic were found to provide better and stable color results compared to inorganic agents like rayon fiber flocking. Polyzois et al. also evaluated the effect of weathering on three different non-pigmented silicone elastomers. They concluded after a period of 1-year study evaluation that significant color changes were seen in all three materials [49]. However, Elastosil M3500 and Ideal materials were more stable than Silskin 2000 and did not show significant variation between them. There is a necessity to experiment and investigate various combinations of nanomaterials to enhance and stabilize the desired color of the prosthesis. Also, nanomaterials can be used to enhance the stability of acrylic metallic junctions.

With the advent of 3D printing and additive manufacturing in the fields of medicine and surgery, the idea of closely mimicking facial features down to nano-scale level seems believable. In a recent study by Zardawi et al. [50], color matched 3D printed soft tissue facial prostheses produced by Z-Corp-Z510 and infiltrated with Sil-25 maxillofacial silicone polymers were generated utilizing starch-based biocompatible materials. With slightly compromised mechanical properties (replacement period in vivo ranging from 6 to 12 months), the technology applied enabled construction of several copies of the prostheses in a shorter time frame and at a lower cost than handmade silicone polymer prostheses. Another advantage of applying rapid prototyping is that producing the required thickness of the missing part that rendering a lightweight prosthesis, which is mostly valued by the patients showed a significant improvement over the existing fabrication protocols.

# References

1. Sybil D. Anatomic challenges in surgical reconstruction and functional rehabilitation of maxillofacial skeleton. Int J Recent Sci Res. 2018;9(2):23899-903.  
2. Booth PW, Schendel SA, Hausamen JE. Maxillofacial surgery, vol. 2. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2007. p. 83-92.  
3. Guerrero-Santos J, Altamirano JT. The use of lingual flaps in repair of fistulas of the hard palate. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1996;38:123-8.

4. Tiwari R. Masseter muscle crossover flap in primary closure of oral-pharyngeal defects. J Laryngol Otol. 1987;101:172-8.  
5. Egyedi P. Utilization of the buccal fat pad for the closure of oro-antral and oro-nasal communications. J Maxillofac Surg. 1977;5:241-4.  
6. Cohen IK, Edgerton MT. Transbuccal flaps for the reconstruction of the floor of mouth. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1971;48:8-10.  
7. Lentz J. Ankylose osseuse de la machoire inférieure, resection du col condyle avec interposition du muscle temporal entre les surfaces de resection. Congrès Franc de Chir 1895;113.  
8. McGregor IA. The temporal flap in intra-oral cancer. Br J Plast Surg. 1963;16:318-23.  
9. McGregor IA, Jackson IT. The extended role of the deltopectoral flap. Br J Plast Surg. 1970;23:173-9.  
10. Jiano J. Paralizie faciale dupa extriparea unei tumori a parotidee trata prin operatia dlui gomoue. Bull Mem Soc Clin Bucharest 1908:22.  
11. Conley J. Use of composite flaps containing bone for major repairs in the head and neck. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1972;49:522-6.  
12. Ariyan S. The pectoralis major myocutaneous flap: a versatile flap for reconstruction in the head and neck. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1979;63:73-81.  
13. Futrell JW, Johns ME, Edgerton MT, et al. Platysma myocutaneous flap for intraoral reconstruction. Am J Surg. 1978;136:504-7.  
14. Quillen CG, Shearing JG, Georgade NG. Use of Latissmusdorsimyocutanoeus island flap for reconstruction in the head and neck area: case report. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1978;62:113-7.  
15. Martin D, Pascal JF, Baudet J, Mondie JM, Farhat JB, Athoum A, et al. The submental island flap: a new donor site: anatomy and clinical applications as a free or pedicled flap. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1993;92:867-73.  
16. Wang HS, Shen JW, Ma D, Wang JD, Tian AL. The infrahyoidmyocutaneous flap for reconstruction after resection of head and neck cancer. Cancer. 1986;57:663-8.  
17. Taylor GI. Reconstruction of mandible with free composite iliac bone grafts. Ann Plast Surg. 1982;9:361-8.  
18. Ueba Y, Fujikawa S. Nine years follow up of a free vascularized fibular graft in neuro fibromatosis: a case report and literature review. Int J Orthop Trauma Surg. 1983;26:595-600.  
19. O'Brien BM, Morrison WA. Reconstructive microsurgery, vol. 76. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1987. p. 97-101.  
20. Soutar DS, Scheker LR, Tanner NSB, McGregor IA. The radial forearm flap: a versatile method for intraoral reconstruction. Br J Plast Surg. 1983;36:1-8.  
21. dos Santos LF. The vascular anatomy and dissection of the free scapular flap. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1984;73:599-605.  
22. McCraw JB, Furlow LT. The dorsalis pedis arterialized flap. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1975;55:177-85.  
23. Forrest C, Boyd JB, Manktelow RT, Zuker R, Bowen V. The free vascularized iliac crest tissue transfer: donor site complications associated with 82 cases. Br J Plast Surg. 1992;45:89-93.  
24. Han Y, Kiat-amnuay S, Powers JM, Zhao Y. Effect of Nano-oxide concentration on the mechanical properties of a maxillofacial silicone elastomer. J Prosthet Dent. 2008;100:465-73.  
25. Guttal SS, Patil NP, Nadiger RK, Hasti A. Nasal prosthesis for a patient with mammalian bite injury. Case report. J Indian Prosthodont Soc. 2007;7:43-5.  
26. Guttal SS, Patil NP, Shetye AD. Case report: Prosthetic rehabilitation of a midfacial defect resulting from lethal midline granuloma—a clinical report. J Oral Rehabil. 2006;33:863-7.  
27. Guttal SS, Patil NP, Nadiger RK, Rachana KB, Dharnendra, Basutkar N. Use of acrylic resin base as an aid in retaining silicone orbital prosthesis. J Indian Prosthodont Soc. 2008;8:112-5.  
28. Avinash CKA, Nadiger R, Guttal SS, Lekha K. Orbital prosthesis: a novel treatment approach. Int J Prosthodont Restor Dent. 2012;2(1):19-23.  
29. Guttal SS, Patil NP, Thakur S, Kumar SMV, Kulkarni S. Implant-retained nasal prosthesis for a patient following partial rhinectomy: a clinical report. J Prosthodont. 2009;18:353-8.

30. Guttal SS, Shanbhag S, Kulkarni SS, Thakur SL. Rehabilitation of a missing ear with an implant retained auricular prosthesis. J Indian Prosthodont Soc. 2015;15:70-5.  
31. Guttal SS, Desai J, Kudva A, Patil BR. Rehabilitation of orbital defect with silicone orbital prosthesis retained by dental implants. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2016;64:93-5.  
32. Melek LN. Tissue engineering in oral and maxillofacial reconstruction. Tanta Dent J. 2015;12(3):211-23.  
33. Zayed SM, Alshimy AM, Fahmy AE. Effect of surface treated silicon dioxide nanoparticles on some mechanical properties of maxillofacial silicone elastomer. Int J Biomater. 2014;2014:750398, 7 p.  
34. Van Schooneveld MM, Vucic E, Koole R, et al. Improved biocompatibility and pharmacokinetics of silica nanoparticles by means of a lipid coating: a multimodality investigation. Nano Lett. 2008;8(8):2517-25.  
35. Shakir DA, Abdul-Ameer FM. Effect of nano-titanium oxide addition on some mechanical properties of silicone elastomers for maxillofacial prostheses. J Taibah Univ Med Sci. 2018;13(3):281-90.  
36. Mitra A, Choudhary S, Garg H, et al. Maxillofacial prosthetic materials-an inclination towards silicones. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014;8(12):ZE08-13.  
37. Alsmael MA, Moudhaffer M, Ali M, et al. The effect of nano titanium silicate addition on some properties of maxillofacial silicone material. J Res Med Dent Sci. 2018;6:127-32.  
38. Salih SI, Oleiwi JK, Ali HM. Modification of silicone rubber by added PMMA and natural nanoparticle used for maxillofacial prosthesis applications. ARPN J Eng Appl Sci. 2019;14(4):781-91.  
39. Yazdani J, Ahmadian E, Sharifi S, et al. A short view on nanohydroxyapatite as coating of dental implants. Biomed Pharmacother. 2018;105:553-7.  
40. García C, Ceré S, Durán A. Bioactive coatings deposited on titanium alloys. J Non-Cryst Solids. 2006;352(32-35):3488-95.  
41. Breding K, Jimbo R, Hayashi M, et al. The effect of hydroxyapatite nanocrystals on osseointegration of titanium implants: An in vivo rabbit study. Int J Dent. 2014;2014:171305.  
42. Svanborg LM, Hoffman M, Andersson M, et al. The effect of hydroxyapatite nanocrystals on early bone formation surrounding dental implants. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2011;40(3):308-15.  
43. Carinci F, Lauritano D, Bignozzi CA, et al. A new strategy against peri-implantitis: antibacterial internal coating. Int J Mol Sci. 2019;20(16):3897.  
44. Romanò CL, Tsuchiya H, Morelli I, et al. Antibacterial coating of implants: are we missing something? Bone Joint Res. 2019;8(5):199-206.  
45. Wafa H, Grimer RJ, Reddy K, et al. Retrospective evaluation of the incidence of early periprosthetic infection with silver-treated endoprostheses in high-risk patients: case-control study. Bone Joint J. 2015;97-B(2):252-7.  
46. Akash RN, Guttal SS. Effect of incorporation of nano-oxides on color stability of maxillofacial silicone elastomer subjected to outdoor weathering. J Prosthodont. 2015;24:569-75.  
47. Kiat-Amnuay S, Mekayarajjananonth T, Powers JM, Chambers MS, Lemon JC. Interactions of pigments and opacifiers on color stability of MDX4-4210/type A maxillofacial elastomers subjected to artificial aging. J Prosthet Dent. 2006;95:249-57.  
48. Haug SP, Andres CJ, Moore BK. Color stability and colorant effect on maxillofacial elastomers. Part III: weathering effect on color. J Prosthet Dent. 1999;81:431-8.  
49. Polyzois GL. Color stability of facial silicone prosthetic polymers after outdoor weathering. J Prosthet Dent. 1999;82:447-50.  
50. Zardawi FM, Xiao K. Optimization of maxillofacial prosthesis. In: Prosthesis. London: IntechOpen; 2019. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.85034.
