---
title: "Zygomatic Implants in Oncology Patients"
authors:
  - "Chris Butterworth"
journal: "Zygomatic implants"
year: 2020
pages: "151-196"
url: "http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-29264-5_9"
publisher: "Springer International Publishing"
source_file: "butterworth-2020-zygomatic-implants-in-oncology-patients.md"
---
# Zygomatic Implants in Oncology Patients

Chris Butterworth

# Challenges of the Maxillofacial Oncology Patient

The maxillofacial oncology patient presents far more difficulties to the treating clinical team than any other patient who might benefit from the use of zygomatic implants. The central position of the maxilla within the face and its various relationships to important structures, such as the orbits, the nose, the mouth, the oropharynx, the face and the teeth, mean that the resection of any part of the maxilla and mid-face can have devastating consequences for the patient, even if their presenting disease is adequately controlled. The requirement to reconstruct and rehabilitate the patient is extremely high in order to effectively restore what was removed where at all possible, hopefully in a meaningful way to which the patient can adapt and continue to function successfully. The restoration of facial form, dental cosmesis, and the preservation of functions such as speech, chewing, mouth opening and swallowing are paramount considerations in the management of these patients. The collaboration of a multi-disciplinary team including head and neck surgeons, oncologists, radiologists, pathologists, maxillofacial prosthodontists, speech and language therapists, anaplastologists and others is important if patients are not going to be merely cured but effectively treated and rehabilitated to the highest level possible. Ideally, these patients should be managed in a high-volume head and neck cancer centre where significant inter-disciplinary care can be developed and provided, as these tumours are relatively rare, with maxillary and mid-facial cancers making up less than  $6\%$  of all head and neck cancers. Without an intensive collaborative multi-disciplinary approach, patients can be often left devastated, deformed and depressed with very poor quality of life (QOL). In addition, there is evidence that the long-term survival of this group of patients is lower than other sites within the head and neck [1] so the need for rapid and effective patient management is paramount. The emotional effects of this disease site should also not be forgotten with patients and their families often requiring significant emotional support and counselling prior to treatment.

# The Integrated Surgical Maxillofacial Prosthodontist

In the Merseyside Head & Neck Cancer Centre, we have developed a model of care for this group of patients with a strong emphasis on including a surgical maxillofacial prosthodontist, whose main role is to emphasise the importance of prosthodontic and prosthetic implant-based rehabilitation for these patients and to deliver joint pre-prosthetic surgery and implant placement at the time of tumour resection. Our surgical team almost always includes a resective surgeon, a micro-vascular reconstructive surgeon and a surgical maxillofacial prosthodontist for patients with maxillary and mid-facial tumours. Following initial presentation and tissue diagnosis, patients are seen for a team evaluation together with review of supporting MRI, CT and dental radiographs in order to generate a comprehensive treatment plan and to decide whether the approach will be palliative, curative and/or rehabilitative. The patient's overall medical fitness is assessed especially if microvascular free tissue transfer is to be considered. A detailed dental assessment is undertaken to diagnose teeth with poor prognosis that should be removed. When required, dental impressions are made and photographs are also taken to plan dental rehabilitation and to produce surgical templates or obturator prostheses.

# Ideal Treatment Goals

With all the available clinical information, together with the input of the patient and their family, the aims of the proposed treatment will be explained. Primarily, patients are concerned about the potential for cure and survival. However, the effect on cosmesis and post-treatment function has to be explained and understood. The potential need for post-operative (chemo-)radiotherapy is always discussed as well as its likely effect on the surgical/prosthetic reconstruction and other quality of life aspects.

Where a curative and rehabilitative approach is undertaken, the ideal goals of treatment are:

- Disease control/cure  
- Preservation/restoration of facial form  
- Separation of the oral cavity from the nose/antrum  
Dental rehabilitation  
Rapid treatment and rehabilitation  
- Low prosthodontic maintenance  
- Restoration of a functional quality of life

Disease control is beyond the scope of this chapter to discuss in detail, although, needless to say, it is highly dependent on the presenting stage of disease, the particular tumour biology and behaviour, as well as the adequacy of the initial resection and, if undertaken, response to adjuvant chemo-(radiotherapy). When tumours are diagnosed at an early stage, outcomes and survival are generally better. The preservation or restoration of facial form is directly linked mainly to the vertical degree of the maxillary or mid-facial resection required. The greater the degree of bony resection required, the greater the impact on the postoperative facial form and the greater the need for micro-vascular bony reconstructive techniques. This is especially true when the orbital floor and/or zygoma are resected. In nasal/mid-facial resections, some patients may be managed with complex and often staged micro-vascular reconstructive surgeries, although the cosmetic outcome may not be as good as a prosthesis and the potential need for adjuvant radiotherapy often makes a prosthesis a more flexible option. The restoration of the teeth is also critical to lip support which, in turn, also contributes to the final facial form following treatment.

The separation of the mouth from the nasal or antral cavities is very important for patients and clinicians alike, as it impacts greatly on functions such as speaking and swallowing. It can be accomplished either with an obturator prosthesis and/or surgically via local flaps or free tissue transfer. The decision is often based on the patient's fitness for more advanced surgical techniques as well as the availability of local surgical expertise. There is no consensus or strong evidence that one approach is better than the other in terms of functional outcomes, as both can give good results for chewing and speech [2]. However, there is no doubt that prosthetic obturation brings about the potential for fluid and air leakage, crusting and hygiene issues, and has a negative impact psychologically on some patients. The dental rehabilitation of these patients is the main thrust of this chapter and it is clear that rehabilitation has been transformed by the advent and use of zygomatic implants. When maxillary obturators are employed in a carefully planned manner, dental rehabilitation can be immediate with the fitting of a surgical obturator with teeth being placed on the day of surgery. However, when free tissue transfer is employed to close maxillary defects, the use of conventional prosthodontic rehabilitation is often not possible and the maxillofacial prosthodontist is left to rely on the placement of oral implants to provide a useful dental rehabilitation.

The provision of rapid dental and facial prosthetic rehabilitation on the whole mandates the insertion of zygomatic and dental implants at the same time as the primary surgery. This provides the opportunity for their early use, often before radiotherapy is begun, and before post-treatment scarring and fibrosis have occurred. There is certainly a growing trend towards primary implant placement in the mandible at the time of tumour resection [3] with all its advantages for this patient group and, in the author's experience, the need for baseline zygomatic implant insertion in maxillary and mid-face patients is even greater. Fortunately, when zygomatic implants are used primarily, the high initial stability achieved by the anchorage into the zygomatic basal bone allows for use of immediate and early loading protocols [4] that can yield effective support and retention for oral and facial prostheses within a short period of time after initial surgical resection. This is a significant advantage of using zygomatic implants rather than other techniques such as digitally planned composite flap reconstructions for patients with malignant diseases of the maxilla. Whilst this latter technique is a viable alternative, it generally does not allow prosthodontic restoration at an early time point if post-operative chemo-radiotherapy is to be used. A recent publication from the Alberta group [5] who use this technique extensively confirmed that their mean time to restoration is approximately 9 months, although the number of maxillary cases was small and it was unclear how many of the five patients treated were for malignancy and how many had received post-operative radiotherapy. Whilst 9 months to restoration is still a great improvement on previous conventional prosthodontic rehabilitation approaches in general, it is still a long period to be without a restoration in an ideal sense and this is an area where zygomatic implants can facilitate a more rapid approach.

Prosthodontic maintenance can be a significant issue for patients treated for malignancies in these sites. Even when zygomatic implants are employed to provide in-defect support and retention for complex prostheses, multiple and regular clinic visits maybe required, especially where obturator or facial prostheses are employed. This adds to a patient's overall burden of treatment. Where a screw-retained fixed zygomatic implant-supported dental prosthesis can be employed, the requirement for maintenance can be very much reduced and the number of clinic visits reduced. This concept underpins the rationale for the maxillary ZIP Flap [6] which, as will be described later, combines the use of surgical closure of the maxillary defect with a fixed dental prosthesis. The restoration of a functional quality of life is very much a composite outcome based on a large number of factors and, in many respects, is affected by the outlook of the individual patient and his/her experiences. However, it is important to state the importance of ongoing work in this area, especially where new techniques are being adopted in order to gather patient-centred input to validate both patient acceptance and the functional efficacy of the treatments used. Due to the small numbers of patients potentially treated each year, even in high-volume centres, it is highly unlikely that randomised controlled trials could be sufficiently powered and so the inclusion of these quality-of-life outcome measures together with patient interviews is important in helping to understand the advantages and limitations of the treatments used. Whilst a number of validated patient questionnaires have been devised, the most-commonly used ones in our unit are the University of Washington Quality of Life Questionnaire (version 4) and the Liverpool Oral Rehabilitation Questionnaire (version 3) [7]. The combination of these QOL questionnaires allow evaluation of specific functional aspects such as chewing, swallowing and speech as well as more detailed patient information regarding aspects of the prosthodontic reconstructions. Regardless of treatment protocol employed or questionnaires used, our primary aim is to restore a functional quality of life as rapidly as possible following treatment by addressing and managing key patient clinical issues.

# Disease Classification and Treatment Options

The use of anatomical classifications is a helpful adjunct when considering the different treatment approaches, as there is a great deal of difference in the complexity of treating a small low-level maxillary alveolus tumour compared to a large midfacial cancer invading the orbit. Whilst a number of classifications have been published, we favour the use of the Brown Classification [8] which distinguishes between the vertical component of the proposed surgical resection (Classes I-VI) and the horizontal component of the resection (Classes a-d). This classification (Fig. 1) also helps to delineate three main groups of patients, namely:

- Low-level maxillary resections (Classes I and II).  
- High-level maxillary resections (Classes III and IV).  
Non-alveolar mid-facial resections (Classes V and VI).

The majority of this chapter discusses the management of low-level maxillary tumours, as these make up the majority of the presenting cases. In addition, these low-level resections favour the use of zygomatic and modified zygomatic on a much more regular basis. Later sections explore the use of zygomatic implants together with composite free flaps for high-level tumours, and we also discuss the application of zygomatic implants to support and retain nasal and mid-facial silicone prostheses.

# Low-Level Maxillary Resections

# Class I

The class I resection is the smallest vertical resection of the maxilla and generally relates to a resection mainly of alveolar bone only rather than involving the basal bone of the maxilla or hard palate itself. The most common clinical presentation requiring a class I resection is malignant gingival tumours. In the anterior pre-maxillary region, it does not result in a communication to the nasal cavity (Fig. 2), but resection of the alveolus posterior to the canine region often results in the creation of a defect in the maxillary antrum (Fig. 3). The rehabilitative approach for a class I resection will depend on the residual dental status and the access and bone availability for implant placement. For limited anterior pre-maxilla. The tumour necessitated the removal of the anterior teeth from canine to canine at a minimum together with a class I bony resection. In order to facilitate a fixed dental rehabilitation following this resection, the first premolars were also removed. Prior to surgery, impressions were made to fabricate an interim partial denture to be fitted at the time of surgery to support mucosal healing over the resected alveolus.


Under general anaesthesia, teeth were removed prior to the resection of the tumour specimen incorporating the gingival tissue and underlying bone which was resected utilising piezosurgery for improved cutting control. Following the resection, access was gained to the right and left zygomatic regions and buccal windows created in the lateral sinus walls in order to preserve the integrity of the sinus membrane throughout the procedure (Fig. 5). The bony window and sinus membrane were mobilised and allowed to fall in towards the antrum with reflection of the membrane from the alveolar aspect and also supero-laterally to allow identification of the best entry points to the zygomatic bone itself. Following this, the initial pilot holes were made in the zygomatic bones and then via the residual alveolus prior to full drilling sequence along the desired implant path. In Class I alveolar resections, the path of the zygomatic implant is usually intra-sinus due to the significant loss of alveolar height. The author ensures active management of the sinus membrane together with a localised lifting and grafting procedure at the alveolar end where the bone is often very limited. The additional grafting (with xenograft/autogenous bone scrapings) ensures that the bone around the head of the zygomatic implant is robust and that any bone loss here is unlikely to result in an oro-antral communication. Grafting is also undertaken between and over the threads of the zygomatic implants. A collagen or platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) membrane is then used to cover the augmented region during the healing phase in an attempt to encourage further bone formation along the length of the implant. The final angulation of the implant heads is carefully evaluated once placed with respect to the opposing dentition by the use of direction pins screwed into the implant heads as a final check procedure. Once the implants are installed and the sinus bone grafting completed, abutments are placed and torqued into position. A split-skin graft is harvested from the thigh and inset over the denuded bone surface in the anterior maxilla in and around the implant heads. Master impressions and an interocclusal jaw registration record are made and final soft tissue closure is undertaken. Finally, the temporary denture prosthesis is refined with periodontal dressing material and fitted prior to recovery of the patient (Fig. 6). Two weeks later, the temporary denture prosthesis is removed and the surgical area is cleaned. A try-in procedure is undertaken on a cast cobalt chromium framework to ensure that intra-operative records are accurate and that the final tooth position is appropriate. The definitive pathology is reviewed to ensure that adequate margins had been obtained prior to fitting the definitive prosthesis 1 week later (Fig. 7). The healing of the split skin graft is monitored and tailored oral hygiene measures are instituted by the patient. The patient is kept under regular review on a 6-8 week basis for disease surveillance in the first year as per our oncology review protocol.


# Zygomatic Implant Designs

The author exclusively uses the range of zygomatic implants provided by Southern Implants Ltd. (Fig. 8), as they provide a number of different advantages for different anatomical situations and especially for the oncology patient. The connections are the same as is the implant head angulation which is at  $55^{\circ}$  to the long axis. Where possible, when placing zygomatic implants in a conventional manner, the author favours the use of the conventional zygomatic implant with its roughened surface along its entire length as, together with the active sinus management described above, the expectation is subsequent osseointegration along the length of the implant. Where the size of the zygoma is limited and a quad approach is necessary, the use of an implant with a narrower apex such as the Zygan™ Implant is employed.

As well as a narrow apex at  $3.4\mathrm{mm}$  with  $15\mathrm{mm}$  of threads, it has a coronal thread with a low surface roughness and a central machined, polished surface. Where the zygomatic implant is to be placed in an oncology-defect situation, as we will see in the Class II defect next, the Zygomatic Oncology Implant provides an excellent solution for the clinician and patient alike. This implant has the same apical size as a conventional implant  $(4.8\mathrm{mm})$  and has  $15\mathrm{mm}$  of threads with the rest of the implant having a machined polished finish. This ensures that where the implant emerges into the maxillary or nasal defect, it promotes improved soft tissue health and is easier to clean compared to an implant with roughened threads. The Oncology Implant also functions well for conventional extra-maxillary placement where this is required on a non-defect atrophic maxilla.

# Low-Level Maxillary Resections

# Class II

The Class II defect is the most commonly dealt with defect in this group of patients and provides a number of significant challenges. One of the most significant issues is how to manage the resultant oro-nasal communication. Compared to Class I defects, the Class II defect is not easily closed with local tissue and, generally, a key choice must be made between prosthetic obturation and free vascularised tissue closure. The horizontal component of Class II defect is also critical and Fig. 9 illustrates three different Class II defects, the anterior maxillary resection (sub-class 'c'),

As the horizontal component of the resection increases, the more difficulty patients experience with conventional obturation due to reduction in the amount of unaffected maxilla and/or retained teeth present to provide support and retention for the prosthesis. Where the residual teeth are poor or the patient is edentulous, the level of compromise through obturation alone increases further and the need for implant assistance is greater in order for retention and stability of the prosthesis. Where the resection involves the soft palate, effective prosthetic obturation is even more challenging due to the mobile cut-edge of the soft palate. Therefore, ideally, where the soft palate is affected, the author prefers surgical reconstruction. If the patient is deemed fit enough for free tissue transfer, then this is a useful way of closing the surgical defect, but the use of these techniques can significantly compromise the degree to which the patient can be rehabilitated dentally. Whilst the use of soft tissue flaps to close Class II defects is common, these flaps do not provide a suitable level of support for a dental prosthesis and often patients are left without a good option for rehabilitation. The use of composite (bone-containing) flaps such as the fibula, scapula or DCIA can be employed in the larger low-level resections, but morbidity is greater and technical difficulty increases for the surgeon. In smaller low-level defects, their use is difficult, if not impossible. Whilst some teams routinely employ digital planning for composite flap reconstruction together with primary implant insertion, this is far from ubiquitous and for most patients, implant-based rehabilitation will be a secondary consideration with significant delays for the patient, especially if a patient is irradiated following his/her resective surgery.


All in all, a balance has to be struck between the medical fitness and motivation of the patient, the size of the resection, the involvement of the soft palate, the post-resection dental status and quality, the likelihood of post-operative trismus and the skill set and resources of the treating multi-disciplinary team. The speed of dental rehabilitation will very much depend on the techniques employed and this should be discussed with a patient, especially if he/she has a high dental awareness and motivation.

# Class II Decision-Making Algorithm

The next step is to assess the dental status of the patient and particularly the position of the resection on the alveolus. The number and quality of the remaining teeth after the proposed resection should be carefully investigated by thorough clinical

Class II defect Algorithm and radiographic examination together with an assessment of the opposing dentition, the vertical dimension, the occlusal plane and any degree of vertical maxillary excess.

When patients present with a high-quality dentition, these may be retained, especially if the resection is posterior to the canine tooth (Fig. 11). Most patients can cope well with this shortened arch functionally and additional units may generally be provided for improved appearance if required by means of a small removable partial denture.

If the resection reached the midline or beyond, the goal is either to undertake bony reconstruction to retain the residual high-quality teeth and to provide a subsequent implant-based rehabilitation into the composite flap or to undertake a ZIP

Flap [6] by placing zygomatic oncology implants on the defect side and consider the elective removal of teeth on the non-defect side to facilitate the placement of immediate dental implants into sockets or to allow the placement of conventional zygomatic implants if socket implants are problematic (Fig. 12). As the ZIP Flap allows for much quicker post-surgical dental rehabilitation for malignant tumours than the techniques associated with composite flaps, it has become our treatment of choice for Class II maxillary defect.

When the dental status is poor or the patient is already edentulous but fit for a soft tissue flap reconstruction, the ZIP Flap is the treatment of choice for those patients wishing to have a dental rehabilitation as part of their oncology treatment.

# ZIP Flap Technique [6]

The Zygomatic Implant Perforated Flap technique, first published in 2017, was developed by the author and combines benefits conferred by both soft tissue free-flap reconstruction (usually a radial forearm flap) to close the oro-nasal defect with simultaneous zygomatic oncology implant placement into the residual zygomatic bone, and allowing the immediate use of the implants by perforating the soft tissue of the flap with a long abutment at the time of flap insertion (Fig. 14). Dental impressions and interocclusal or maxillo-mandibular registration procedures are undertaken during the primary surgery and a definitive implant-supported fixed bridge is subsequently fitted in the weeks following surgery, even if adjuvant radiotherapy is required for ongoing disease management.

squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the right maxillary alveolus requiring a Brown Class IIb resection. On presentation, it was clear that her dental status was poor with generalised periodontitis, hyper-eruption of some teeth along with an ill-fitting maxillary removable partial denture. Prior to surgery, dental casts were mounted and an intermediate maxillary complete denture was fabricated to be used as an interim registration device during surgery. On the day of surgery, remaining teeth were extracted and a Class IIb resection was undertaken, taking care not to disrupt the pterygoid region and, hence, reduce the chances of post-operative trismus. Four standard endosseous implants were placed in the mandible. A right neck access procedure was completed to find vessels to supply the soft tissue free flap. Zygomatic oncology implants were then inserted into the residual zygomatic bone on the resected side with conventional zygomatic implants being inserted on the non-defect side. The placement of the oncology implants takes a much more horizontal path than their conventional counterparts (Fig. 19) in order to reduce the chances of exposure of the implant shaft due to the action of the buccinator muscle at the margin of the flap. The radial forearm free flap is raised by the reconstructive team in parallel to the implant placement. Following implant placement and closure of the non-defect side, multi-unit abutments are placed and torqued. Longer  $5\mathrm{mm}$  abutments are usually placed on the oncology implants to facilitate the subsequent flap perforation procedure. Impression copings are attached to the abutments and splinted together utilising a light-cured acrylic material (Individo® Lux; VOCO GmbH; Germany). Protective caps of known height are placed onto multi-unit abutments and the maxillary complete denture prosthesis is refined with silicone impression material to provide a guide to the tooth position, lip support and incisal level.


The radial forearm flap is inset to the maxillary defect and its pedicle tunneled beneath the skin into the neck. Once the periphery of the flap had been sutured into position, the flap is carefully incised over the implant abutments which are pushed through the flap, ensuring a tight fit around the abutment. A small piece of polyvinyl mouth guard material is used to stop the flap covering the abutments during the healing period. It is trimmed to encompass both implants and perforated with a 4-mm tissue biopsy punch to ensure a tight fit on the implant abutments. New tapered abutment caps are placed in order to retain the polyvinyl sheet during the healing period (Fig. 15). The flap pedicle is anastomosed to vessels in the right neck prior to final neck wound closure and subsequent patient recovery.

Approximately 2 weeks later, the patient is seen in clinic for evaluation and for the try-in of her fixed hybrid bridge prosthesis with a cobalt chromium metal framework. The plastic shield is removed and the tooth position examined. Minor changes are made to the tooth position and incisal level and the finalised metal-acrylic bridgework placed 1 week later. The definitive pathology is favourable and post-operative radiotherapy is not required. The patient is provided with a mandibular implant overdenture 2 months later. The soft tissue response around the oncology implant abutments is monitored and patient-specific oral hygiene measures are instituted. The patient reported a high degree of satisfaction with the results of her treatment. She reported high scores on follow-up QOL questionnaire evaluations with preservation of speech quality and a significant improvement in her masticatory ability compared to her pre-surgical state. Her facial appearance is unaffected by the surgery (Fig. 18).


The ZIP Flap can also be employed for larger Class IIc defects (Figs. 20, 21 and 22) as well as more anterior Class IIc defects (Figs. 23, 24, 25 and 26). In addition, thicker Antero-lateral thigh (ALT) flap may be used in larger defects, but we have found it harder to perforate on the day of surgery than the radial forearm flap due to the bulk and increased risk to the small perforating vessels. For an ALT case, we elect to return 3 weeks post-surgery with a completed prosthesis and to perforate at that time with some flap de-bulking (Fig. 21). The prosthesis rectifies sagging of the large flap and the patient may go through post-operative radiotherapy with no adverse events to the flap or implant restoration. The dental and facial appearances

Conventional Zygomatic Placement  
Oncology Zygomatic Placement

are preserved well and the patient's speech is extremely clear. A patient may initially struggle to eat due to the bulk of the flap and significant xerostomia which causes the food particles to stick to the flap. He continues in follow-up and a recent 18-month review demonstrated very acceptable facial and intra-oral appearances with some further shrinking of the flap (Fig. 22). The importance of postradiotherapy shrinkage of soft tissue flaps in the maxilla should also be highlighted, as if too small a flap is harvested initially and the tissue is subsequently inset with some tension as well as implant perforation, there is a risk that it will pull away from the palate and create a fistula. Our approach has always been to take a generously proportioned soft tissue graft which can be inset into the maxillary defect without tension and have some scope for further shrinkage if radiotherapy is required. One of our early cases experienced flap breakdown at the palate margin but since adopting a more generous size graft approach, we have not had any cases of flap breakdown.

For the IIc anterior defect (Fig. 23), controversy exists about whether bone is required to support the anterior part of the nose. However, in our experience, this is not a major issue, as we feel that addition of extra soft tissue bulk in this region and the lip support provided by the fixed dental prosthesis yields a good facial result (Fig. 26).

The ZIP Flap, in our opinion, is an elegant technique that combines disease control and rapid functional rehabilitation for patients with low-level Class II maxillary tumours with low prosthodontic maintenance and preservation of QOL. It has allowed more patients to be dentally rehabilitated than in previous years and has simplified the treatment flow for many of our patients. Further longitudinal research is currently in place within our unit examining its efficacy in the long term.

# Obturation of Class II Maxillary Defect

If patients are unfit for complex surgical approaches, prosthodontic obturation is mandated in order to preserve a patient's speech, chewing and swallowing functions. This form of treatment has been in existence for decades and is the mainstay of Class II defect management in many parts of the world. A myriad of techniques exist for the fabrication of both simple single-part and highly complex multi-part obturators to address the challenges of patients undergoing this form of treatment. Primary support for a conventional obturator relies on the amount of remaining hard palate and the quality of the remaining teeth, whilst retention is provided mainly by direct clasping of undercuts on natural teeth. If these undercuts do not exist, some clinicians undertake extensive restoration of the remaining teeth to improve tooth contour to improve the prognosis for the obturator prosthesis. Some retention may be provided by the maxillary defect as long as it is carefully prepared at the time of surgery with adjunctive procedures such as split-skin grafting to the cheek and removal of the inferior turbinate. Even with such modifications, conventional obturators always lack support on the major defect side and have a tendency to displace into the defect during function. If remaining teeth are poor or absent on the non-defect side, there is a tendency for the obturator to move during speech and chewing and this movement can cause soft tissue trauma and ulceration in some patients. In the Class IId situation, especially following total maxillectomy (Fig. 27), all support is provided by the sensitive internal structures of the nose, and patients find these prostheses extremely difficult to tolerate and with which to function.


Assessment of a patient's dental status and motivation is extremely important at the pre-operative stage in formulating a treatment plan. The plan should encompass the extraction of any teeth with poor prognosis, the retention of strategic teeth which will contribute to the support and retention of the obturator, together with the placement of dental and/or zygomatic implants to provide additional support and retention.

Depending on the position and size of the maxillary resection, the final obturator can be supported and retained by teeth alone (Fig. 28), a combination of teeth and implants (Figs. 29 and 30), or be entirely implant-supported (Figs. 31 and 32). As the horizontal component of the palatal resection increases, there is a greater reliance on zygomatic implant placement to provide in-defect support and retention. The oncology zygomatic implant is the main implant used to support maxillary obturators in the defect and the author's preference is to place them at the time of primary resective surgery. The primary stability, angulation and final implant head position is critical for successful prosthodontic use. Generally, zygomatic implants should emerge in the canine and second premolar regions with the heads being at about the level of the previous root apices. It is also helpful to angulate the implant heads anteriorly to provide improved prosthodontic access in the case of post-operative trismus, which is not uncommon. Where possible, two oncology implants are placed on the defect side and where the patient has good-quality teeth remaining on the non-defect side, this can be enough to provide a well-supported and retained one-piece obturator. The implants are always splinted together with a cast bar incorporating precision attachments to retain the final prosthesis. There is no need for adjuvant split-skin


grafting in these cases and the final obturator bung can be a 'low-profile' polished acrylic design with only enough engagement into the defect to affect a peripheral seal as the retention of the prosthesis is being provided by the implants. If only a single oncology implant can be placed on the defect side, additional implants should be placed on the non-defect side, with the sacrifice of additional teeth if required. In the edentulous patient, additional implants should always be placed on the non-defect side to provide splinting to the defect implants and additional retention and support on the non-defect side. In the total maxillectomy situation, bilateral oncology implants can be placed ideally in a quad configuration.

Following resection and implant placement, an abutment-level impression is made to capture remaining teeth and palatal contours and the superficial component of the defect. Significant undercuts within the defect and around the oncology implants should be blocked out with surgical gauze. An approximate maxillo-mandibular registration can be undertaken using a pre-made appliance and following this, the surgical obturator is placed. The author's preference is to use silicone putty to refine the surgical obturator in the defect with some material entering the undercuts around the implant abutment heads to provide temporary retention on the defect side. The patient is usually returned to the operating room 2 weeks later to remove the surgical obturator, clean the defect and fit the interim implant-supported obturator. The author often uses large magnets housed within a cobalt chrome cast bar as the primary means of retention, as it requires much less dexterity from patients (who are often elderly) in order to correctly seat the prosthesis. This patient group requires a significant level of clinical support in the early


months following treatment, especially if adjuvant radiotherapy is required. A dental hygienist is a useful resource in supporting a patient's hygiene measures around implant superstructures. As the defect changes post-treatment, further modifications to the prosthesis to ensure an adequate peripheral seal may be required.

# High-Level Maxillary Resections (Class III/IV)

In addition to the removal of the maxillary alveolus and palate, high-level Class III resections involve the removal of additional structures such as the zygoma and the orbital floor. In Class IV resections, the orbital contents are removed as well. These types of resection are often required due to large maxillary sinus tumours that present late and are difficult to treat and usually require combined treatment with radiotherapy. The dental rehabilitation of this group of patients is extremely difficult and is poorly described in the literature. Ideal management of these defects from a rehabilitation point of view involves use of composite free tissue transfer, which may provide bone for facial support and implant placement. In our unit, the vascularised hip graft based on the deep circumflex iliac artery (DCIA) is the first-choice flap for a class III defect, although this is a highly technique-sensitive reconstruction. The challenge for the reconstructive surgeon is placing the bone to provide both facial support and bone for implant placement. Figures 33 and 34 illustrate the management of a patient requiring a Class IIIb resection for SCC with a DCIA reconstruction and secondary implant-based rehabilitation. The CT scan demonstrates how the bone flared away from the dental arch out more posteriorly. In this case, the use of a quad zygomatic


approach not only deals with the very atrophic non-defect side but is also used to bring the heads of the implants into the correct position on the reconstructed side to support the subsequent metal/acrylic fixed bridgework. The use of zygomatic implants directly into the DCIA flap is helpful as the bone is often of low-density. The use of longer implants together with some under-drilling allows the insertion of the implant while still achieving good primary stability.

# Non-alveolar Mid-facial Resections (Classes V and VI)

The final group of oncology patients benefitting from placement of zygomatic implants are those presenting with orbito-facial (Class V) and mid-facial (nasal) (Class VI) malignancies that require radical surgery and a subsequent facial sinus without perforating the sinus membrane. The sinus membrane is elevated from the anterior piriform region across to the medial internal aspect of the zygomatic body. An initial pilot hole is made into the zygoma to ensure ideal placement and maximal primary stability. The entrance hole for the osteotomy is then made through the thin bone of the lateral nasal wall and the path of the implant follows along the slot window created in the lateral maxillary wall and, ultimately, connects with the pilot hole in the zygomatic body. The drill sequence is followed with the osteotomy traversing the body of the zygomatic bone through to its external surface. The appropriate length implant is then placed using this extra-sinus and, yet, intra-maxillary path. Xenograft bone is utilised over exposed threads together with a collagen-based membrane prior to wound closure. The implant procedure is repeated on the contralateral side and, if bone exists, in the nasion region, a short dental implant may be


placed. Split-skin grafts are placed on the lateral aspects of the wound and over the superior surface of the lip to provide a robust environment for a prosthesis and to reduce scar contraction of the upper lip (Fig. 36). Abutments are placed/torqued and the impression copings are splinted into place with light-cured acrylic material to ensure an accurate pick up. The excess undercut within the nasal cavity is blocked out with gauze and a facial impression is made using a combination of silicone impression materials (medium/heavy body). Fragments of wooden tongue spatulae are used to reinforce the impression and prevent distortion and a final alginate impression is made to capture the wider facial field including the eyes. The whole impression is supported and backed by a modified plastic facial shield normally used by hairdressers. This removes the need to back the impression with plaster of Paris and makes the impression process much shorter. The nose is packed and the patient is fitted with a temporary nasal shield whilst waiting for his/her first silicone prosthesis. The impression is poured to permit fabrication of a cast metal bar incorporating precision attachments or a magnet as well as the initial nasal template. The try-in visit is usually scheduled for 4 weeks post-operatively to allow time for healing with the initial implant-retained prosthesis being fitted around 6 weeks (Fig. 37). Patients requiring radiotherapy usually start treatment around the same time and every effort is made to fit the initial prosthesis beforehand.


In Class V defects, the overall zygomatic implant strategy is the same with implants being oriented in a horizontal fashion, although the extent of the resection allowing for use of oncology implants where the lateral maxillary wall has been resected. In addition to horizontal zygomatic implant placement, standard dental implants can be placed into the superior orbital rim and this combination of implants used to support a one-piece metal framework with embedded retaining magnets used to retain the more extensive facial prosthesis. Figures 38, 39, 40 and 41 illustrate the management of a recent case presenting with an extensive class V facial SCC.


# Zygomatic Implant Survival in Oncology Patients

The use of zygomatic implants in oncology patients reported in the literature is quite limited to date, but is a growing area of publication. The initial reports from the work inspired by Professor Branemark were presented briefly in a paper by Parel [11] in 2001 and referenced a small series of approximately 24 patients

The study of Boyes-Varley et al. [4] in 2007, however, reported the highly successful placement of the first zygomatic oncology implants in 20 patients at the time of primary maxillectomy surgery together with additional dental implants placed on the non-defect side. They also reported the immediate loading of these implants in the 2 weeks following surgery to support precision-retained obturator prostheses. They reported  $100\%$  implant survival over 6–96 months follow-up with this protocol and acknowledged the large prosthodontic burden of visits, especially associated with adjustments around speech.

The apparent disparity between survival rates for primarily placed versus secondarily placed zygomatic implants led to a prospective study by the author over a 10-year period from 2006 to 2016 to examine the survival and usability of implants placed at our centre together with an analysis of any differences due to timing of placement or anchorage concept (publication in press 2018). The study population included 49 patients and 131 zygomatic implants. Only nine implants have been lost during this study period and the 12-month and 60-month survival estimates were  $94\%$  and  $92\%$ , respectively. Half the patient group received radiotherapy prior to or immediately following implant placement. Interestingly, there were no statistically significant differences in respect to the timing of implant placement or whether the implant was placed conventionally or with the remote anchorage concept. These data demonstrate the high promise of the zygomatic implant technique for patients with mid-facial and maxillary malignancy irrespective of the need for radiotherapy, and support the concept of early placement and early restoration as the emerging standard of care.


# Summary

Conventional and modified zygomatic implants provide a highly effective platform in the support of oral and facial prosthetic rehabilitation in oncology patients. Whether they are used in isolation or in conjunction with other surgical reconstructive techniques, the remote anchorage concept is robust, providing high primary stability and the opportunity for early prosthetic rehabilitation of this unfortunate and deserving patient group. The rehabilitation-focused multi-disciplinary head and neck cancer team would be well advised to embrace zygomatic implants as part of their armamentarium of treatment options.

Table 1 Main published evidence regarding the use of zygomatic implants for dental rehabilitation in maxillary oncology patients  

<table><tr><td>Study</td><td>Cohort/approach</td><td>Radiotherapy</td><td>N</td><td>Follow-up</td><td>Zygomatic implant survival</td></tr><tr><td>Parel et al. [11]</td><td>Maxillectomy/cleft defects—secondary placement</td><td>Not stated</td><td>27 patients; 65 zygomatic implants</td><td>1–12 years</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>Schmidt et al. [12]</td><td>Large maxillary defects mainly malignant—two primary placement; seven secondary placement</td><td>Four post-implant placement; one pre-implant placement</td><td>9 patients; 28 zygomatic implants; 10 dental</td><td>Not stated</td><td>79% (only five patients restored)</td></tr><tr><td>Zwahlen et al. [13]</td><td>Mix of patients including five patients with maxillary defects (secondary placement and 6 month integration period)</td><td>Not stated</td><td>5 patients; 9 zygomatic implants; 42 dental</td><td>Not stated</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>Boyes-Varley et al. [4]</td><td>Maxillectomy defects. Primary placement. Immediate loading</td><td>Five post-implant placement; one pre-implant placement</td><td>20 patients; 40 oncology implants; 66 dental</td><td>6–96 months</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>Landes et al. [14].</td><td>Mixture of patients including maxillary defects; two primary placement; ten secondary placement; delayed loading</td><td>Seven post-implant radiotherapy; seven pre-implant chemotherapy</td><td>12 patients; 26 zygomatic; 18 dental</td><td>15–100 months</td><td>77%</td></tr><tr><td>Huang et al. [15]</td><td>Maxillary resection ± composite reconstruction; secondary placement</td><td>No radiotherapy</td><td>24 patients; 9 zygomatic; 79 dental</td><td>18–137 months</td><td>89%</td></tr><tr><td>Pellegrino et al. [16]</td><td>Maxillectomy defects. Secondary placementImmediate loading (four patients); delayed loading (one patient)</td><td>One patient post-implant placement</td><td>5 patients; 17 zygomatic implants</td><td>10–29 months</td><td>94%</td></tr><tr><td>Butterworth [17]</td><td>Mid-facial and maxillary oncology patients; primary vs. secondary placement; early and delayed loading</td><td>Nine pre-implant placement; 15 post-implant placement</td><td>49 patients; 135 zygomatic implants; 33 dental</td><td>2–110 months</td><td>94% 12-month survival estimate 92% 60-month survival estimate</td></tr></table>

# References

1. Brown JS, Bekiroglu F, Shaw RJ, Woolgar JA, Rogers SN. Management of the neck and regional recurrence in squamous cell carcinoma of the maxillary alveolus and hard palate compared with other sites in the oral cavity. Head Neck. 2013;35(2):265-9.  
2. Moreno MA, Skoracki RJ, Hanna EY, Hanasono MM. Microvascular free flap reconstruction versus palatal obturation for maxillectomy defects. Head Neck. 2010;32(7):860-8.  
3. Barber AJ, Butterworth CJ, Rogers SN. Systematic review of primary osseointegrated dental implants in head and neck oncology. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2011;49(1):29-36.  
4. Boyes-Varley JG, Howes DG, Davidge-Pitts KD, Branemark I, McAlpine JA. A protocol for maxillary reconstruction following oncology resection using zygomatic implants. Int J Prosthodont. 2007;20(5):521-31.  
5. Chuka R, Abdullah W, Rieger J, Nayar S, Seikaly H, Osswald M, et al. Implant utilization and time to prosthetic rehabilitation in conventional and advanced fibular free flap reconstruction of the maxilla and mandible. Int J Prosthodont. 2017;30(3):289-94.  
6. Butterworth CJ, Rogers SN. The zygomatic implant perforated (ZIP) flap: a new technique for combined surgical reconstruction and rapid fixed dental rehabilitation following low-level maxillectomy. Int J Implant Dent. 2017;3(1):37.  
7. Dholam KP, Chouksey GC, Dugad J. Oral health-related quality of life after prosthetic rehabilitation in patients with oral cancer: a longitudinal study with the Liverpool Oral Rehabilitation Questionnaire version 3 and Oral Health Impact Profile-14 questionnaire. Indian J Cancer. 2016;53(2):256-60.  
8. Brown JS, Shaw RJ. Reconstruction of the maxilla and midface: introducing a new classification. Lancet Oncol. 2010;11(10):1001-8.  
9. Bowden JR, Flood TR, Downie IP. Zygomaticus implants for retention of nasal prostheses after rhinectomy. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2006;44(1):54-6.  
10. Scott N, Kittur MA, Evans PL, Dovgalski L, Hodder SC. The use of zygomatic implants for the retention of nasal prosthesis following rhinectomy: the Morriston experience. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2016;45(8):1044-8.  
11. Parel SM, Brænemark PI, Ohrnell LO, Svensson B. Remote implant anchorage for the rehabilitation of maxillary defects. J Prosthet Dent. 2001;86(4):377-81.  
12. Schmidt BL, Pogrel MA, Young CW, Sharma A. Reconstruction of extensive maxillary defects using zygomaticus implants. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2004;62(9 Suppl 2):82-9.  
13. Zwahlen RA, Gratz KW, Oechslin CK, Studer SP. Survival rate of zygomatic implants in atrophic or partially resected maxillae prior to functional loading: a retrospective clinical report. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants. 2006;21(3):413-20.  
14. Landes CA, Paffrath C, Koehler C, Thai VD, Stübinger S, Sader R, et al. Zygoma implants for midfacial prosthetic rehabilitation using telescopes: 9-year follow-up. Int J Prosthodont. 2009;22(1):20-32.  
15. Huang W, Wu Y, Zou D, Zhang Z, Zhang C, Sun J, et al. Long-term results for maxillary rehabilitation with dental implants after tumor resection. Clin Implant Dent Relat Res. 2014;16(2):282-91.  
16. Pellegrino G, Tarsitano A, Basile F, Pizzigallo A, Marchetti C. Computer-aided rehabilitation of maxillary oncological defects using zygomatic implants: a defect-based classification. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015;73(12):2446.e1-e11.  
17. Butterworth C. Primary vs secondary zygomatic implant placement in patients with head and neck cancer-A 10-year prospective study. Head Neck. 2019;41(6):1687-95.
