---
title: "Tooth Loss and General Quality of Life in Dentate Adults from Southern Brazil"
authors:
  - "Dandara Gabriela Haag"
  - "Karen Glazer Peres"
  - "David Simon Brennan"
journal: "Quality of Life Research"
year: 2017
volume: "26"
issue: "10"
pages: "2647-2657"
doi: "10.1007/s11136-017-1587-4"
url: "http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11136-017-1587-4"
source_file: "haag-2017-tooth-loss-and-general-quality-of-life-in-dentate-adults-from-southern-brazil.md"
---
# Tooth loss and general quality of life in dentate adults from Southern Brazil

Dandara Gabriela Haag $^{1}$  · Karen Glazer Peres $^{1}$  · David Simon Brennan $^{1}$

Accepted: 26 April 2017/Published online: 8 May 2017  
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017

# Abstract

Purpose This study aimed to estimate the association between the number of teeth and general quality of life in adults.

Methods A population-based study was conducted with 1720 individuals aged 20-59 years residing in Florianópolis, Brazil, in 2009. Data were collected at participants' households using a structured questionnaire. In 2012, a second wave was undertaken with 1222 individuals. Oral examinations were performed for number of teeth, prevalence of functional dentition (≥21 natural teeth), and shortened dental arch (SDA), which were considered the main exposures. General quality of life was the outcome and was assessed with the WHO Abbreviated Instrument for Quality of Life (WHOQOL-BREF). Covariates included sociodemographic factors, health-related behaviors, and chronic diseases. Multivariable linear regression models were performed to test the associations between the main exposures and the outcome adjusted for covariates. Results In 2012, 1222 individuals participated in the study (response rate = 71.1%). Having more teeth was associated with greater scores on physical domain of the WHOQOL-BREF [β = 0.24 (95% CI 0.01; 0.46)] after adjustment for covariates. Absence of functional dentition was associated with lower scores on the physical domain [β = -3.94 (95% CI -7.40; -0.48)] in the adjusted analysis. There was no association between both SDA definitions and the domains of general quality of life.

Conclusions Oral health as measured by tooth loss was associated with negative impacts on general quality of life assessed by the WHOQOL-BREF. There was a lack of evidence that SDA is a condition that negatively affects general quality of life.

Keywords Quality of life  $\cdot$  WHOQOL-BREF  $\cdot$  Tooth loss  $\cdot$  Shortened dental arch  $\cdot$  Functional dentition

# Background

Quality of life refers to all emotional, social, and physical aspects that influence individuals' well-being. In health sciences, health-related quality of life (HRQoL) encompasses aspects of general quality of life that can be clearly shown to be affected by health [1]. Severe tooth loss (<9 teeth) affects  $2\%$  of the global population, and was ranked 36th among 100 health conditions causing significant disability within populations as reported in the Global Burden Disease 2010 study [2]. Studies on the association between presence of teeth and quality of life have primarily evaluated oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL) through oral health-specific instruments, such as the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-14) [3]. Given that oral health is an inseparable part of general health, individuals' dentition status can affect quality of life related to general health, as well as individuals' overall well-being. Hence, investigations on the impact of oral conditions on general quality of life are important [4, 5].

Dentition status can impact quality of life through different pathways. First, tooth loss can adversely affect functionality, which may ultimately impact daily activities of the affected individuals, such as mastication, food choice, and speech [6]. Second, compromised dental aesthetics can potentially impair self-esteem and social relationships [7]. Studies have further shown that both the presence and the position of remaining teeth within the oral cavity influence individuals' quality of life [8, 9]. Due to these reasons, several definitions of dentition status are proposed based on their position and impact on functionality and aesthetics in order to ascertain their effects on oral health. Two definitions include functional dentition and the shortened dental arch (SDA). The definition of functional dentition is based on number of teeth present. A minimum of 21 teeth present in an individual qualifies as functional dentition [10]. On the other hand, SDA is defined according to the availability of occlusal units (points of contact between upper and lower teeth). Furthermore, SDA's definitions are subdivided into having either 3-5 occlusal units [11] or 4 occlusal units [12]. Apart from the presence of intact anterior teeth, which is mandatory to both definitions of SDA, clinical studies have suggested that individuals with SDA can meet the requirements for a functional and healthy occlusion, including mastication efficiency and an adequate articulation of the mandible [11, 12]. Additionally, studies on the association between SDA and OHRQoL have shown that individuals with SDA have similar quality of life in comparison with those with more posterior occlusal units [8, 9]. Apart from the definitions of functional dentition and SDA, overall number of teeth present within oral cavity also impacts oral health [3].


While some population-based studies have investigated the association between number of teeth and general quality of life, only two studies from Australia assessed the association between functional dentition and this outcome [4, 13], and no studies investigated the impacts of SDA on general quality of life. However, investigations on the association between these definitions and OHRQoL are comparatively more common [3]. Testing the association between dentition status and general quality of life is important as generic measures, such as the WHOQOL-BREF, are able to establish the impacts of oral conditions in relation to general health and overall quality of life. Furthermore, disease-specific measures were primarily developed as social dental indicators rather than a construct to measure quality of life [14]. The use of generic measures of quality of life is further justified as it also allows comparability between the impact of oral and systemic conditions on quality of life.

Testing associations between different definitions of dentition status and general quality of life is important as these associations will reflect different processes. While number of teeth represents an overall evaluation of oral health, being related to multiple general health outcomes and mortality [2], a functional dentition reflects the minimum threshold for an adequate oral functionality [10]. Furthermore, considering that SDA provides an adequate level of mastication efficiency, the differences in quality of life between individuals with more occlusal units and those with SDA will inform a rational decision for replacement of posterior missing teeth [9]. Given the lack of evidence on the association between different definitions of dentition status and general quality of life, particularly in low and middle income countries, the current study aims to fill this significant gap in the literature. To address this, the aim of this study was to test associations between number of teeth as a continuous measure, functional dentition, and SDA with general quality of life using representative population data of adults from Florianópolis, Brazil. The three underlying hypotheses are that (i) individuals with fewer teeth would have lower general quality of life, (ii) shortened dental arch would not negatively affect general quality of life, and (iii) individuals with functional dentition would report better general quality of life comparing with those with  $< 21$  teeth.


# Methods

# Study setting

Data were from the second wave (2012) of the population-based cohort study EpiFloripa. The baseline was undertaken in 2009 and the target population included all adults aged from 20 to 59 years residing in the urban area Florianopolis  $(N = 408,163$  inhabitants in 2009;  $59\%$  adults), a middle-sized city in Southern Brazil.

# Sampling procedures

In 2009, a reference population of 249,530 adults was considered for sample size estimations. The sample size was calculated to estimate the prevalence of different outcomes considering the following parameters: expected prevalence of  $50\%$  for unknown outcomes, sampling error of 4.0 percentage points, confidence level of  $95\%$ , design effect of 2.0, and percentage of  $10\%$  to compensate for refusals. The final calculation lead to a sample size equal to 2016 individuals of which a participation rate of  $85.3\%$ $(n = 1720)$  was obtained.

The sampling selection was performed by clusters in two stages. Firstly, the census tracts of the city were systematically selected, followed by a random selection of households. Seventeen of the 437 census tracts were excluded due to lack of information. The average monthly income of the head of the family was used to order the 420 census tracts, adopting a systematic sample of 60 tracts (six tracts in each income decile). In order to minimize the variation in the number of households per tract, census tracts with a lower number of households were combined with those with a higher number of households taking the contiguity, location, and socioeconomic similarities into account. The tracts were then divided resulting in 63 tracts selected. Afterwards, a random selection of households was adopted (1134/16,755). Considering a mean of 1.78 persons per household, the sampling process would identify 2016 adults. All adults residing in the selected households (20-59 years) were eligible to participate. Exclusion criteria included amputees; bedridden individuals; individuals with casts; and those who were unable to answer the questionnaire or remain in the required position for measurements. Those who could not be found after four attempts or refused to participate were considered as missing. A second wave of the study was carried in 2012, and all individuals evaluated in 2009 ( $n = 1720$ ) were traced. Before considering the participants as losses to follow-up, four attempts of phone scheduling and a similar number of visits to the household were performed. A pilot study was performed in two census tracts that were not included in the sample. Based on the pilot study, interviewers were provided with mobile phones so the contact with the field supervisors was facilitated.


# Data collection

Face to face interviews regarding sociodemographic characteristics and health-related behaviors were performed (2009). In the second wave (2012), oral examinations were also performed at participants' homes by eight dentists and the three main exposures were assessed.

# Main exposure—dentition status

The number of missing, decayed, and filled teeth was assessed by the DMFT index [15]. The total number of permanent teeth was assessed by counting the number of sound, decayed, and filled teeth. Later, the prevalence of functional dentition  $(\geq 21$  teeth) [10] was estimated. The number of occlusal units was computed to estimate the prevalence of SDA, which was classified in two definitions: (1) having intact anterior teeth and 3-5 natural occlusal units [11]; (2) having intact anterior teeth and 4 natural occlusal units [12]. The reference groups comprised individuals with more occlusal units than the number established by both definitions of SDA. Individuals with any anterior missing tooth were excluded for both SDA variables  $(n = 277)$ . All edentulous subjects were excluded  $(n = 36)$ . Dental examiners were trained and calibrated with 20 adults who were not included in the final sample. The Kappa index and intraclass correlation coefficient for the DMFT index ranged from 0.88 to 0.94.

# Outcome

General quality of life was the outcome assessed in 2012 using the World Health Organization Abbreviated Instrument for Quality of Life Assessment (WHOQOL-BREF), validated in Brazil in 2000 [16]. The WHOQOL-BREF assesses the quality of life in the previous two weeks. It contains 26 questions; two general questions and 24 distributed into four domains: physical  $(n = 7)$ , psychological  $(n = 6)$ , social relationships  $(n = 3)$ , and environment  $(n = 8)$ . The items' scores range from 1 (not at all/very poor/very dissatisfied/never) to 5 (an extreme amount/extremely/very good/very satisfied/always), and were transformed into a 0-100 scale, with higher scores indicating better quality of life [17].

# Covariates

Covariates were investigated using a structured questionnaire and through oral epidemiological examinations.

The monthly household income was calculated as the sum of incomes of all family members living in the household. It was collected in 2009 in the Brazilian currency (Real), converted into American dollars (1.9 Real  $= \mathrm{US\$  1}$ in 2009), and classified into tertiles: (1st: 0.00-1,315.8US$; 2nd: 1315.9-2,631.6US$, 3rd: 2,631.7US$-max). The number of individuals residing in the household was included in the regression models. Educational status (years of study) was assessed in 2009. Smoking status was investigated using the Fageström Test for Nicotine Dependence [18] in 2009 as never smoked/former smoking/light current smoking (<10 cigarettes daily)/moderate current smoking (10-20)/heavy current smoking (>20). Participants were weighed, measured, and had their blood pressure assessed in 2012. Those with systolic blood pressure above 120 mm Hg and/or a diastolic blood pressure above 90 mm Hg were considered as having hypertension [19]. The Body Mass Index (BMI) was calculated by dividing the weight in kilograms by the square of the height in metres ( $kg/m^2$ ). Individuals were then categorized in normal range (18.50-24.99), overweight (25.00-29.99), or obese ( $\geq$ 30.00) [20]. Diabetes and cardiovascular disease were self-reported (2009) and investigated with the following questions: "Have you already been told by a physician that you have diabetes/cardiovascular disease? (yes/no)." Dental pain was investigated in 2009 by the question: "Have you had dental pain in the previous six months? (yes/no)." Xerostomia was assessed in 2012 using the question "How often does your mouth feel dry?": Never/occasionally/often/always (categorized as never/occasionally-often/always [21]). The number of untreated decayed teeth was assessed using the

DMFT index [15]. Individuals with  $\geq 4\mathrm{mm}$  attachment loss and  $\geq 4\mathrm{mm}$  periodontal pocketing in the same tooth were classified as having periodontal disease.

# Quality control

Data quality control of the questionnaire was conducted by administering it through a telephone interview to  $15\%$  of the sample  $(n = 248$  in 2009,  $n = 183$  in 2012). Interviewer reliabilities were assessed using  $\kappa$  statistics and intraclass correlation coefficient, ranging from 0.60 to 0.90 in 2009 and from 0.60 to 0.95 in 2012.

# Statistical analysis

The descriptive statistics included the distribution of the sample according to the explanatory variables and the WHOQOL-BREF items. Linear regressions were used to test the association between the explanatory variables and the domains of quality of life, followed by multivariable linear regressions adjusted for covariates. Firstly, the outcome was included in the model, followed by sociodemographic variables (sex, age, and household income), health-related behaviors (smoking habits), health conditions (BMI, hypertension, diabetes) and oral conditions (number of decayed and filled teeth, periodontal disease, and dental pain). For the number of teeth, the use of complete denture was also controlled for. The rationale for the inclusion of the selected variables in the models as potential confounders was theoretically based. Sociodemographic factors (age, income, sex) have been associated both with the exposure [22] and outcome [23]. Similarly, general health conditions (diabetes, obesity) [24, 25], health-related behaviors (smoking status) [26, 27,] and conditions of the remaining teeth (untreated dental caries, periodontal disease) [28] have been associated with dentition status and quality life. Therefore, all potential confounders were included in the adjusted models independently of the level of statistical significance in the association between the exposure and/or outcome. The internal consistency index Cronbach's alpha was used to assess the reliability of the WHOQOL-BREF domains (acceptable value  $>0.70$ ) [29]. The statistical analysis was performed on STATA  $12.0^{\text{®}}$  using the svy command to account for cluster sample design and sampling weight. In 2009, the weight was calculated by multiplying the inverse probability of selection of census tract by the inverse probability of household selection. Less than two individuals on average were interviewed per household. For this reason, dependence in this case was considered insignificant [30, 31]. In 2012, the sample was re-weighted, considering probability of localization.

# Results

In 2012, 1222 individuals participated in the study (response rate  $= 71.1\%$ ). The internal consistency index Cronbach's alpha for the Physical, Psychological, Social Relationships, and Environment domains was 0.78, 0.72, 0.60, and 0.72, respectively. The correlations between the WHOQOL-BREF domains were weak to moderate, with the lowest correlation observed between the social relationships domain and environment domain ( $r = 0.33$ ) and the highest correlation between the physical and the psychological domain ( $r = 0.60$ ). The majority of the sample were female ( $56.4\%$ ), and the mean age was 38.7 years. The mean number of teeth was 25.1, and the mean of decayed teeth was 0.4 (data not shown). The prevalence of functional dentition was  $83.4\%$ , while  $7.1\%$  of the individuals had a SDA according to the first definition (3-5 occlusal units) and  $4.4\%$  of them had the second definition of SDA (4 occlusal units) (Table 1).

In the bivariate analysis, older individuals, smokers, those with xerostomia, dental pain and individuals without a functional dentition reported lower scores across all the domains of the WHOQOL-BREF. Females and individuals with lower income and education status, those with diabetes, and those with dentures had worse scores on physical, psychological, and environment domains. No difference in quality of life between individuals with SDA according to both definitions and those with other dentition status was observed (Table 1). On the other hand, the number of teeth was associated with all the domains, and the higher the number of teeth, the higher the quality of life (data not shown).

Most of the individuals reported their overall quality of life and their general health as good or very good. Similarly, the majority of the individuals reported good or very good quality of life on the Physical, Psychological, and Social Relationship domains. For the environment domain, most of the individuals reported regular and good quality of life (Table 2).

After adjusting for sex, age, household income, number of individuals per household, educational status, smoking habits, BMI, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, number of decayed teeth, periodontal disease, xerostomia, and dental pain, the association between the absence of a functional dentition and worse quality of life remained for the physical domain  $[\beta = -3.94$ $95\%$  CI  $-7.40; - 0.48)]$ . Likewise, the higher the number of teeth, the better the scores on the physical domain  $[\beta = 0.24$ $95\%$  CI 0.01; 0.46)] after adjustment for covariates. There was no association between SDA (both definitions) and quality of life. Similarly, individuals with less occlusal units than what is established by both definitions of SDA

Table 1 Characteristics of the sample and unadjusted associations of the sample characteristics according to the mean values of the WHOQOL-BREF, Florianópolis, Brazil, 2012  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Variables</td><td rowspan="2">Sample na(%)b</td><td colspan="2">Physical</td><td colspan="2">Psychological</td><td colspan="2">Social relationships</td><td colspan="2">Environment</td></tr><tr><td>Mean (95% CI)</td><td>p</td><td>Mean (95% CI)</td><td>p</td><td>Mean (95% CI)</td><td>p</td><td>Mean (95% CI)</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td>Sex (n = 1186)</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>0.068</td><td></td><td>0.005</td></tr><tr><td>Male</td><td>510 (43.6)</td><td>76.6 (75.4–77.9)</td><td></td><td>73.8 (72.6–75.0)</td><td></td><td>76.4 (74.9–77.9)</td><td></td><td>63.7 (62.1–65.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Female</td><td>676 (56.4)</td><td>71.7 (70.1–73.1)</td><td></td><td>69.4 (68.0–70.8)</td><td></td><td>74.7 (73.4–75.9)</td><td></td><td>60.7 (58.6–62.8)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Age (in years) (n = 1186)</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>0.033</td><td></td><td>0.016</td><td></td><td>0.051</td></tr><tr><td>23–32</td><td>328 (29.5)</td><td>77.0 (75.5–78.6)</td><td></td><td>72.9 (71.3–74.5)</td><td></td><td>77.5 (75.5–79.6)</td><td></td><td>62.1 (60.1–64.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>33–42</td><td>276 (23.8)</td><td>73.3 (70.8–75.9)</td><td></td><td>70.0 (67.9–72.1)</td><td></td><td>74.2 (72.3–76.0)</td><td></td><td>60.4 (58.0–62.8)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>43–52</td><td>336 (27.0)</td><td>72.3 (70.6–73.9)</td><td></td><td>71.6 (70.1–73.1)</td><td></td><td>76.6 (72.4–76.8)</td><td></td><td>62.8 (60.9–64.7)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>53–62</td><td>246 (19.8)</td><td>70.4 (67.6–73.2)</td><td></td><td>70.2 (68.5–71.9)</td><td></td><td>73.7 (71.5–75.8)</td><td></td><td>64.1 (62.1–66.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Household income (in Brazilian Reais) (n = 1160)</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>0.803</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><td>1rd tertile (higher)</td><td>339 (29.8)</td><td>77.4 (75.9–79.0)</td><td></td><td>74.8 (73.3–76.2)</td><td></td><td>75.8 (73.8–77.8)</td><td></td><td>69.7 (67.6–71.8)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2nd tertile</td><td>406 (35.4)</td><td>73.7 (71.8–75.6)</td><td></td><td>71.7 (69.9–73.5)</td><td></td><td>74.9 (73.1–77.8)</td><td></td><td>62.6 (60.9–64.3)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3st tertile (lower)</td><td>415 (34.8)</td><td>71.4 (69.8–72.9)</td><td></td><td>68.4 (67.3–69.6)</td><td></td><td>75.4 (74.0–76.9)</td><td></td><td>55.3 (53.7–57.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Education (in years of study) (n = 1183)</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>0.975</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><td>12 or more</td><td>537 (45.6)</td><td>76.2 (74.8–77.6)</td><td></td><td>73.8 (72.6–75.1)</td><td></td><td>75.9 (74.4–77.5)</td><td></td><td>67.5 (66.0–69.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9–11</td><td>389 (33.4)</td><td>74.4 (72.7–76.2)</td><td></td><td>71.1 (69.1–73.1)</td><td></td><td>75.1 (73.1–77.2)</td><td></td><td>59.6 (57.9–61.3)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5–8</td><td>164 (13.6)</td><td>69.7 (66.4–73.0)</td><td></td><td>67.4 (65.1–69.8)</td><td></td><td>73.9 (70.9–76.9)</td><td></td><td>54.0 (51.2–56.8)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Up to 4</td><td>93 (7.4)</td><td>65.6 (67.0–70.2)</td><td></td><td>65.6 (61.8–69.3)</td><td></td><td>78.6 (74.0–83.1)</td><td></td><td>54.9 (51.5–58.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Smoking status (n = 1179)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.002</td><td></td><td>0.007</td><td></td><td>0.001</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><td>Never smoked</td><td>650 (56.1)</td><td>75.1 (73.7–76.4)</td><td></td><td>72.4 (71.2–73.6)</td><td></td><td>77.2 (76.0–78.4)</td><td></td><td>62.8 (61.1–64.7)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ex-smoker</td><td>317 (26.2)</td><td>74.0 (71.9–76.1)</td><td></td><td>70.6 (68.6–72.6)</td><td></td><td>73.6 (71.9–75.3)</td><td></td><td>62.9 (60.7–65.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Light current smokers</td><td>95 (7.9)</td><td>71.5 (67.5–75.5)</td><td></td><td>72.1 (69.0–75.2)</td><td></td><td>73.6 (69.6–77.6)</td><td></td><td>60.2 (57.0–63.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Moderate and Heavy current smokers</td><td>117 (9.9)</td><td>70.7 (66.9–74.4)</td><td></td><td>67.8 (64.6–70.9)</td><td></td><td>71.6 (67.5–75.7)</td><td></td><td>57.3 (54.4–60.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>BMI (Body mass index) (n = 1100)</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>0.145</td><td></td><td>0.225</td></tr><tr><td>Normal range</td><td>480 (44.9)</td><td>76.5 (75.1–77.9)</td><td></td><td>73.3 (72.1–74.6)</td><td></td><td>76.6 (75.1–78.1)</td><td></td><td>62.6 (60.6–64.6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overweight</td><td>399 (35.5)</td><td>74.1 (72.4–75.8)</td><td></td><td>72.1 (70.9–73.4)</td><td></td><td>74.6 (72.8–76.5)</td><td></td><td>63.4 (61.7–65.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Obese</td><td>221 (19.6)</td><td>69.3 (66.7–71.8)</td><td></td><td>66.5 (64.0–69.1)</td><td></td><td>75.2 (73.1–77.2)</td><td></td><td>60.5 (58.1–62.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Hypertension (n = 1148)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.459</td><td></td><td>0.657</td><td></td><td>0.911</td><td></td><td>0.214</td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>598 (52.2)</td><td>74.3 (72.7–75.9)</td><td></td><td>71.6 (70.2–73.0)</td><td></td><td>75.5 (74.1–76.9)</td><td></td><td>61.7 (59.8–63.7)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>550 (47.8)</td><td>73.5 (71.9–75.2)</td><td></td><td>71.2 (69.9–72.5)</td><td></td><td>75.4 (74.1–76.7)</td><td></td><td>62.8 (61.0–64.5)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cardiovascular disease (n = 1185)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.003</td><td></td><td>0.054</td><td></td><td>0.376</td><td></td><td>0.099</td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>1104 (93.4)</td><td>74.6 (73.5–75.7)</td><td></td><td>71.7 (70.7–72.8)</td><td></td><td>75.6 (74.6–76.7)</td><td></td><td>62.4 (60.7–64.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>81 (6.7)</td><td>66.0 (60.1–71.9)</td><td></td><td>68.3 (64.7–71.9)</td><td></td><td>73.7 (69.2–78.1)</td><td></td><td>59.5 (56.1–63.0)</td><td></td></tr></table>

Table 1 continued  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Variables</td><td rowspan="2">Sample na(%)b</td><td colspan="2">Physical</td><td colspan="2">Psychological</td><td colspan="2">Social relationships</td><td colspan="2">Environment</td></tr><tr><td>Mean (95% CI)</td><td>p</td><td>Mean (95% CI)</td><td>p</td><td>Mean (95% CI)</td><td>p</td><td>Mean (95% CI)</td><td>p</td></tr><tr><td>Diabetes (n = 1185)</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>0.351</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>1143 (96.2)</td><td>74.4 (73.2–75.6)</td><td></td><td>71.6 (70.5–72.7)</td><td></td><td>75.5 (74.4–76.6)</td><td></td><td>62.2 (60.6–63.8)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>42 (3.7)</td><td>65.6 (59.3–71.8)</td><td></td><td>70.0 (65.8–74.1)</td><td></td><td>76.3 (71.7–80.9)</td><td></td><td>61.4 (55.9–66.8)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Xerostomia (n = 1177)</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>0.037</td></tr><tr><td>Never</td><td>1056 (89.6)</td><td>75.3 (74.2–76.5)</td><td></td><td>72.5 (71.6–73.5)</td><td></td><td>76.3 (75.2–77.4)</td><td></td><td>62.5 (60.8–64.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Sometimes/often/always</td><td>121 (40.5)</td><td>62.1 (58.0–66.3)</td><td></td><td>61.9 (57.8–65.9)</td><td></td><td>68.3 (64.3–72.3)</td><td></td><td>58.9 (55.5–62.4)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Periodontal disease (n = 1104)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.398</td><td></td><td>0.197</td><td></td><td>0.456</td><td></td><td>0.359</td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>1075 (97.3)</td><td>74.0 (72.8–75.2)</td><td></td><td>71.6 (70.6–72.7)</td><td></td><td>75.4 (74.4–76.4)</td><td></td><td>62.2 (60.6–63.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>29 (2.7)</td><td>71.2 (64.4–78.0)</td><td></td><td>69.2 (65.1–73.3)</td><td></td><td>77.4 (71.8–82.9)</td><td></td><td>60.1 (55.0–65.1)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Use of denture (n = 1177)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.002</td><td></td><td>0.016</td><td></td><td>0.666</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>1064 (91.0)</td><td>74.7 (73.5–75.9)</td><td></td><td>71.8 (70.7–73.0)</td><td></td><td>75.6 (74.5–76.7)</td><td></td><td>62.6(61.0–64.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>113 (9.0)</td><td>66.9 (62.4–71.3)</td><td></td><td>67.5 (64.3–70.7)</td><td></td><td>74.8 (71.4–78.2)</td><td></td><td>56.9 (53.9–59.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Dental pain (n = 1177)</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>0.004</td><td></td><td>0.046</td><td></td><td>0.002</td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td>943 (80.6)</td><td>75.2 (73.9–76.5)</td><td></td><td>72.2 (71.1–73.3)</td><td></td><td>76.1 (74.9–77.3)</td><td></td><td>63.0(61.4–64.6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td>234 (19.4)</td><td>69.6 (67.1–72.0)</td><td></td><td>68.5 (66.4–70.9)</td><td></td><td>73.1 (70.5–75.7)</td><td></td><td>58.8 (55.9–61.6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Dentition status (n = 1099)</td><td></td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td><td></td><td>0.020</td><td></td><td>&lt;0.001</td></tr><tr><td>≥21 (Functional dentition)</td><td>906 (83.4)</td><td>75.1 (73.9–76.4)</td><td></td><td>72.2 (71.0–73.4)</td><td></td><td>75.8 (74.7–76.9)</td><td></td><td>62.9 (61.1–64.6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1–20</td><td>193 (16.6)</td><td>66.2 (63.1–69.2)</td><td></td><td>67.3 (65.1–69.4)</td><td></td><td>72.6 (70.1–75.1)</td><td></td><td>57.5 (55.4–59.6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>SDA1c (n = 822)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.106</td><td></td><td>0.201</td><td></td><td>0.738</td><td></td><td>0.581</td></tr><tr><td>&gt;5 OUd</td><td>715 (86.6)</td><td>75.6 (74.3–76.9)</td><td></td><td>72.6 (71.4–73.7)</td><td></td><td>75.4 (74.0–76.7)</td><td></td><td>63.3 (61.6–65.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3–5 OU (SDA 1)</td><td>71 (7.1)</td><td>70.8 (66.6–75.0)</td><td></td><td>70.4 (67.4–73.4)</td><td></td><td>78.8 (74.8–82.7)</td><td></td><td>62.1 (59.0–65.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&lt;3 OU</td><td>36 (6.8)</td><td>71.5 (63.5–79.6)</td><td></td><td>70.0 (63.9–76.1)</td><td></td><td>72.1 (65.8–78.4)</td><td></td><td>62.4 (57.8–67.2)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>SDA 2e (n = 822)</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.022</td><td></td><td>0.119</td><td></td><td>0.978</td><td></td><td>0.367</td></tr><tr><td>&gt;4 OU</td><td>738 (89.3)</td><td>75.6 (74.3–76.9)</td><td></td><td>62.6 (71.4–73.7)</td><td></td><td>75.4 (74.1–76.7)</td><td></td><td>63.3 (61.6–65.0)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4 OU (SDA 2)</td><td>33 (4.4)</td><td>72.0 (65.4–78.6)</td><td></td><td>70.2 (65.0–75.5)</td><td></td><td>79.0 (73.2–84.8)</td><td></td><td>61.2 (56.5–65.9)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&lt;4 OU</td><td>51 (6.3)</td><td>69.2 (63.3–75.2)</td><td></td><td>69.8 (65.2–74.4)</td><td></td><td>74.3 (69.1–79.5)</td><td></td><td>61.9 (57.3–66.5)</td><td></td></tr></table>

WHOQOL-BREF World Health Organization Abbreviated Instrument for Quality Of Life Assessment a Total respondents in 2012 after exclusion of edentate individuals  
Weighted  
c Shortened dental arch according to the first definition (having 3-5 occlusal units)  
$^{\mathrm{d}}$  Occlusal units  
e Shortened dental arch according to the second definition (having 3 occlusal units).  $p$  values from linear regressions

Table 2 Frequency responses  $(\%)$  for items of the WHOQOL-BREF  

<table><tr><td>Scale points/domains and facets</td><td>1 Poor</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>5 Very good</td></tr><tr><td>General quality of life (n = 1179)</td><td>0.5</td><td>1.9</td><td>10.7</td><td>61.2</td><td>25.7</td></tr><tr><td>General health (n = 1179)</td><td>1.6</td><td>11.2</td><td>12.7</td><td>58.8</td><td>15.7</td></tr><tr><td>Physical (n = 1175)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Activities of daily living</td><td>1.4</td><td>5.3</td><td>14.6</td><td>55.5</td><td>23.1</td></tr><tr><td>Dependence on medicinal substances and medical aids</td><td>2.8</td><td>13.4</td><td>16.3</td><td>33.7</td><td>33.8</td></tr><tr><td>Energy and fatigue</td><td>1.3</td><td>4.7</td><td>32.7</td><td>45.4</td><td>15.9</td></tr><tr><td>Mobility</td><td>1.1</td><td>2.2</td><td>4.5</td><td>24.0</td><td>68.2</td></tr><tr><td>Pain and discomfort</td><td>2.1</td><td>10.5</td><td>19.1</td><td>28.1</td><td>40.2</td></tr><tr><td>Sleep and rest</td><td>4.9</td><td>16.0</td><td>18.6</td><td>39.6</td><td>20.9</td></tr><tr><td>Work capacity</td><td>2.3</td><td>5.2</td><td>10.9</td><td>54.4</td><td>27.2</td></tr><tr><td>Psychological (n = 1176)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Bodily image and appearance</td><td>1.5</td><td>4.2</td><td>22.2</td><td>39.7</td><td>32.4</td></tr><tr><td>Negative feelings</td><td>3.7</td><td>3.5</td><td>12.0</td><td>65.2</td><td>15.6</td></tr><tr><td>Positive feelings</td><td>2.3</td><td>10.9</td><td>24.5</td><td>55.5</td><td>6.8</td></tr><tr><td>Self-esteem</td><td>1.4</td><td>5.1</td><td>15.8</td><td>50.8</td><td>26.9</td></tr><tr><td>Spirituality/religion/personal beliefs</td><td>1.0</td><td>1.6</td><td>8.6</td><td>57.8</td><td>31.0</td></tr><tr><td>Thinking, learning, memory, and concentration</td><td>1.0</td><td>10.1</td><td>27.9</td><td>52.6</td><td>8.4</td></tr><tr><td>Social relationships (n = 1178)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Personal relationships</td><td>1.4</td><td>2.4</td><td>14.7</td><td>52.6</td><td>28.9</td></tr><tr><td>Social support</td><td>1.0</td><td>4.0</td><td>18.0</td><td>47.3</td><td>29.7</td></tr><tr><td>Sexual activity</td><td>3.2</td><td>3.5</td><td>14.4</td><td>53.3</td><td>25.6</td></tr><tr><td>Environment (n = 1178)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Financial resources</td><td>3.5</td><td>16.5</td><td>52.3</td><td>18.1</td><td>9.6</td></tr><tr><td>Freedom, physical safety and security</td><td>1.6</td><td>6.6</td><td>28.6</td><td>53.8</td><td>9.4</td></tr><tr><td>Health and social care: accessibility and quality</td><td>10.8</td><td>18.3</td><td>25.7</td><td>34.0</td><td>11.2</td></tr><tr><td>Home environment</td><td>1.4</td><td>6.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>45.5</td><td>33.3</td></tr><tr><td>Opportunities for acquiring new information and skills</td><td>1.2</td><td>8.5</td><td>26.8</td><td>43.9</td><td>19.6</td></tr><tr><td>Participation in and opportunities for recreation/leisure</td><td>4.2</td><td>23.4</td><td>36.6</td><td>28.6</td><td>7.2</td></tr><tr><td>Physical environment (pollution/noise/traffic/climate)</td><td>1.4</td><td>10.3</td><td>35.6</td><td>44.3</td><td>8.4</td></tr><tr><td>Transport</td><td>5.5</td><td>12.7</td><td>17.9</td><td>41.6</td><td>22.3</td></tr></table>

Florianópolis, Brazil, 2012  
a Weighted data  
b World Health Organization Abbreviated Instrument for Quality Of Life Assessment also had similar quality of life in comparison to those with more occlusal units (Table 3).


# Discussion

The results of the current study indicate that having fewer teeth negatively affected quality of life after adjustment for covariates. Additionally, participants with SDA had similar quality of life than those with more occlusal units in the adjusted analysis. Finally, individuals without a functional dentition had their quality of life impaired compared to those having 21 teeth or more after adjustment for covariates.

Our results substantiate findings from previous evaluations on negative impacts of tooth loss on general quality of life [5, 6]. However, such comparisons are difficult since different generic instruments with distinct scales are used to assess quality of life. The categorization of the number of teeth may also contribute to this issue. For example, some authors set different cut-off points for number of teeth and others analyze it as a continuous variable. This possibility is further corroborated from a literature search we conducted on PubMed database in January, 2017, where several different categorizations of number of teeth were identified in studies that evaluated the association between this exposure and quality of life [4-6, 28, 32-34]. Despite these differences, the findings on negative impact of tooth

Table 3 Adjusted association between dental status and the domains of the WHOQOL-BREF, Florianópolis, Brazil, 2012  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Variables</td><td colspan="2">Physical</td><td colspan="2">Psychological</td><td colspan="2">Social relationships</td><td colspan="2">Environment</td></tr><tr><td>Unstandardized β (95% CI)</td><td>Standardized β (95% CI)</td><td>Unstandardized β (95% CI)</td><td>Standardized β (95% CI)</td><td>Unstandardized β (95% CI)</td><td>Standardized β (95% CI)</td><td>Unstandardized β (95%CI)</td><td>Standardized β (95% CI)</td></tr><tr><td>Number of teeth (n = 1012)</td><td>0.24 (0.02; 0.46)</td><td>0.10 (0.01;0.19)</td><td>0.09 (-0.12; 0.31)</td><td>0.05 (-0.07; 0.17)</td><td>0.04 (-0.21; 0.28)</td><td>0.02 (-0.10; 0.14)</td><td>-0.03 (-0.23; 0.17)</td><td>-0.01 (-0.08;0.06)</td></tr><tr><td>p value</td><td>0.032</td><td></td><td>0.391</td><td></td><td>0.765</td><td></td><td>0.776</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">SDA \( 1^a \)(n = 767)</td></tr><tr><td>&gt;5 occlusal units</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3-5 occlusal units (SDA)</td><td>-1.64 (-5.87; 2.58)</td><td>-0.03 (-0.12; 0.05)</td><td>1.24 (-1.74; 4.21)</td><td>0.10 (-0.14; 0.34)</td><td>5.26 (1.57; 8.95)</td><td>0.10 (0.03; 0.17)</td><td>2.14 (-1.20; 5.47)</td><td>0.04 (-0.02; 0.10)</td></tr><tr><td>&lt;3 occlusal units</td><td>-0.90 (-6.50; 4.60)</td><td>-0.01 (-0.07; 0.05)</td><td>-0.47 (-5.11; 4.18)</td><td>-0.01 (-0.10; 0.09)</td><td>0.10 (-5.51; 5.71)</td><td>0.01 (-0.55; 0.57)</td><td>2.88 (-2.30; 8.07)</td><td>0.04 (0.03; 0.12)</td></tr><tr><td>p value</td><td>0.558</td><td></td><td>0.935</td><td></td><td>0.349</td><td></td><td>0.171</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">SDA \( 2^b \)(n = 767)</td></tr><tr><td>&gt;4 occlusal units</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4 occlusal units (SDA)</td><td>-2.08 (-8.52; 4.35)</td><td>-0.03 (-0.12; 0.06)</td><td>-0.14 (-5.01; 4.73)</td><td>-0.01 (-0.36; 0.34)</td><td>4.31 (-1.10; 9.71)</td><td>0.06 (-0.02; 0.14)</td><td>1.51 (-3.12; 6.13)</td><td>0.02 (-0.04; 0.08)</td></tr><tr><td>&lt;4 occlusal units</td><td>-3.14 (-7.55; 1.26)</td><td>-0.05 (-0.12; 0.02)</td><td>0.31 (-3.52; 4.14)</td><td>0.01 (-0.03; 0.13)</td><td>1.90 (-2.72; 6.52)</td><td>0.03 (-0.04;0.10)</td><td>2.49 (-2.00; 7.00)</td><td>0.04 (-0.03; 0.11)</td></tr><tr><td>p value</td><td>0.142</td><td></td><td>0.898</td><td></td><td>0.179</td><td></td><td>0.240</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">Dentition status (n = 1022)</td></tr><tr><td>≥21 (Functional Dentition)</td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Ref</td><td></td><td>Ref</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1-20</td><td>-3.94 (-7.40; -0.48)</td><td>-0.09 (-0.17; -0.01)</td><td>-1.22 (-3.92; 1.48)</td><td>-0.03 (-0.10; 0.04)</td><td>-1.22 (-4.08; 1.64)</td><td>-0.03 (-0.10; 0.04)</td><td>-1.56 (-4.20; 1.07)</td><td>-0.04 (-0.10; 0.03)</td></tr><tr><td>p value</td><td>0.026</td><td></td><td>0.371</td><td></td><td>0.397</td><td></td><td>0.240</td><td></td></tr></table>

World Health Organization Abbreviated Instrument for Quality Of Life Assessment a Shortened dental arch according to the first definition (having 3-5 occlusal units), all individuals had intact anterior teeth in all categories b Shortened dental arch according to the second definition (having 3 occlusal units), all individuals had intact anterior teeth in all categories.  $p$  values from Multivariable Linear Regressions controlling for sex, age, household income, number of individuals in the household, education, smoking habits, BMI, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, xerostomia, number of  
decayed teeth, periodontal disease, and dental pain. For number of teeth, the use of denture was also included in the model loss on general quality of life in adults are consistent. An Australian study conducted with individuals aged 45-55 years old revealed that participants with less teeth had lower quality of life as measured by the EuroQol in comparison with those with more teeth after controlling for demographic and socioeconomic variables [6]. Mack et al. reported that losing nine or more teeth was negatively associated with the physical domain of quality of life among adults living in Germany and Poland [34]. It is likely that the broadly studied relationship between the number of teeth and OHRQoL may also pertain to general quality of life, and the number of teeth may affect general quality of life through different pathways such as food selection, speech, and aesthetics resulting in poorer wellbeing [6].


Similar observations were made for the association between functional dentition and quality of life. Evidence from an Australian study of a similar age group as the current investigation reported better general quality of life for participants with 21 or more teeth present than those without. This was confirmed using two different instruments, the EuroQol and the Assessment of quality of life (Aqol) [4]. The  $\geq 21$  teeth threshold is based on clinical principles for a healthy occlusion, and it has been associated with nutritional adequacy [10]. Therefore, the lack of a functional dentition could be associated with pain due to chewing discomfort, being related to the items included in the physical domain of the WHOQOL-BREF. Furthermore, previous studies have shown that poor chewing ability is associated with lower quality of life. This may be related to the impact of chewing on food choice, enjoyment of meals and diet, reflecting the importance of number of teeth to overall well-being [5, 6].

Dissimilarity in the consistency of evidence according to age is noteworthy on the negative impact of tooth loss and functional dentition on quality of life. Although reports with adults support inverse associations between the number of teeth and quality of life, findings from population-based studies with elderly show different results. Studies among older adults in Brazil [32] and Australia [13] have reported no impact of tooth loss or lack of functional dentition on quality of life. However, the categories of tooth loss and the quality of life measures were different between these studies. Several factors may contribute to these differences across generations. These may include higher levels of education and more access to information regarding oral health among younger people. In addition, a possible explanation for this difference could relate to the greater resilience among the elderly and to high expectations about health among younger individuals [35].

Participants with SDA reported similar scores across all the quality of life domains in comparison with those with more occlusal units. Similar findings were observed in studies that investigated the association between SDA and OHRQoL [8, 9]. This might be related to an adequate chewing ability among these individuals, since both definitions of SDA contain a number of occlusal units considered acceptable for a healthy occlusion. Our results also showed that individuals with fewer occlusal units than the minimum number established by both SDA definitions also had similar quality of life scores in comparison with those with more occlusal units. However, studies on OHRQoL have shown that these individuals had poorer quality of life in comparison with those with more occlusal units [8, 9]. It is possible that the number of occlusal units may affect OHRQoL, but is not related to general quality of life. Additionally, the presence of intact anterior teeth may mitigate the impacts of missing posterior teeth on general quality of life. Our findings are suggestive that future research should further investigate the impact of location of missing teeth on the association between tooth loss and general quality of life. This particularly relates to the differences between anterior and posterior teeth [3].


Our study has a number of strengths, but also some limitations. To the best of our knowledge, the association between SDA and general quality of life has only been investigated in clinical settings before [33]. Apart from analyzing the number of teeth as a continuous variable, the cut-off point adopted for this variable  $(>21 / \geq 21$  teeth) was based upon occlusion principles that have implications on nutrition and functionality. Means were adopted as the central tendency measure for the outcome, while other studies used medians as cut-off points to classify the participants as having low and high quality of life for each domain of the WHOQOL-BREF [5, 32]. There is no consensus regarding the best approach to deal with this data; however, we followed the instructions proposed by the WHOQOL-BREF user's manual guide [36]. Finally, the domains of the WHOQOL-BREF met acceptable reliability standards, apart from the Social Relationship Domain. Similar values of internal consistency were also observed for the Social Relationships domain in other studies, and this has been attributed to the small number of questions in this dimension [36, 37].

An important limitation of the current investigation is that the presence of chronic diseases was self-reported. The assessment of these diseases through clinical examination and diagnosis would probably be more valid as they are important confounders in the studied association. Furthermore, our study was restricted to the variables collected in the primary survey, and it is possible that residual confounding may exist. Similarly, no psychological conditions were investigated in 2012, limiting the adjustment for this variable. Additionally, individuals with SDA may have different perceptions of quality of life in relation to their prosthetic status [9]. Our study is a secondary analysis; hence, it is limited to the variables collected in the primary survey. Availability of information on prosthetic status would have provided insight on this association. Finally, causal inferences are limited due to the study cross-sectional design.


Our research has some important policy implications. One of the global goals for oral health 2020 is to increase the number of individuals with functional dentitions at ages 35-44 [10]. The evidence provided by this study supports this goal and highlights that preventive strategies aiming at reducing tooth loss should receive special attention. Furthermore, oral health policies should be integrated with general health [3]. Risk factors associated with tooth loss, such as smoking and high sugar intake, are common to other chronic health conditions like cardiovascular disease and diabetes. Furthermore, these risk factors tend to cooccur among the same individuals, mainly among those with lower socioeconomic position, increasing their vulnerability to both systemic and oral conditions [38]. Therefore, preventive strategies should tackle the underlining risk factors for tooth loss by adopting a common risk factor approach.

In the studied population, oral health as measured by tooth loss was associated with negative impacts on general quality life. There was lack of evidence that SDA is a condition that negatively affects quality of life. The current investigation adds to the evidence the study of the association between two forms of accepted dentitions for a healthy occlusion, the SDA and the functional dentition, and adults' general quality of life. A minimum number of teeth was found to be important to adults' quality of life, and future studies should further investigate the impacts of SDA on general quality of life. Prospective studies in different settings should investigate the impact of dentition status on quality of life over time and elaborate on the existing evidence on its importance on the different domains of general quality of life among adults.

Acknowledgements We would like to thank the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq), (Grant numbers 485327/2007-4 and 508903/2010-6), for supporting this research, and the Brazilian program for overseas scholarships, Science without Borders (Process number: 201579/2014-6). We thank Professor Dr. Nilza Nunes da Silva of the Faculty of Public Health, University of São Paulo, for the contributions in sampling and the Municipal Secretary of Health in Florianópolis for the support in the development of the research works.

# Compliance with ethical standards

Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Funding This study was founded by the Brazilian National Council for the Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq:

485327/2007-4 and 508903/2010-6) and the Brazilian program for overseas scholarships, Science without borders.

Ethical approval This study was approved by the ethical committee from the Federal University of Santa Catarina, Brazil (Process: 351/08 and 1772).

Informed consent Informed consent was obtained from all study participants.

# References

1. Wilson, I. B., & Cleary, P. D. (1995). Linking clinical variables with health-related quality of life. A conceptual model of patient outcomes. The Journal of the American Medical Association, 273(1), 59-65.  
2. Marcenes, W., Kassebaum, N. J., Bernabe, E., Flaxman, A., Naghavi, M., Lopez, A., et al. (2013). Global burden of oral conditions in 1990-2010: A systematic analysis. Journal of Dental Research. doi:10.1177/0022034513490168.  
3. Gerritsen, A. E., Allen, P. F., Witter, D. J., Bronkhorst, E. M., & Creugers, N. H. (2010). Tooth loss and oral health-related quality of life: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Quality of Life Outcomes. doi:10.1186/1477-7525-8-126.6.  
4. Brennan, D. S. (2013). Oral Health Impact Profile, EuroQol, and Assessment of Quality of Life instruments as quality of life and health-utility measures of oral health. European Journal of Oral Sciences. doi:10.1111/eos.12035.  
5. Hugo, F. N., Hilgert, J. B., de Sousa Mda, L., & Cury, J. A. (2009). Oral status and its association with general quality of life in older independent-living south-Brazilians. Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0528.2009. 00459.  
6. Brennan, D. S., Spencer, A. J., & Roberts-Thomson, K. F. (2008). Tooth loss, chewing ability and quality of life. *Quality of Life Research*. doi:10.1007/s11136-007-9293-2.  
7. Craddock, H. L. (2010). Consequences of tooth loss (Part 1): The patient perspective-aesthetic and functional implications. Journal of the South African Dental Association, 65(6), 242-245.  
8. Antunes, J. L., Tan, H., Peres, K. G., & Peres, M. A. (2015). Impact of shortened dental arches on oral health-related quality of life. Journal of Oral Rehabilitation, 43(3), 190-197. doi:10.1111/joor.12364.  
9. Tan, H. P., Peres, K. G., & Peres, M. A. (2014). Do people with shortened dental arches have worse oral health-related quality of life than those with more natural teeth? A population-based study. Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology. doi:10.1111/cdoe.12124.  
10. Hobdell, M., Petersen, P. E., Clarkson, J., & Johnson, N. (2003). Global goals for oral health 2020. International Dental Journal, 53(5), 285-289.  
11. Witter, D. J., van Palenstein Helderman, W. H., Creugers, N. H., & Kayser, A. F. (1999). The shortened dental arch concept and its implications for oral health care. Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology, 27(4), 249-258.  
12. Kanno, T., & Carlsson, G. E. (2006). A review of the shortened dental arch concept focusing on the work by the Kayser/Nijmegen group. Journal of Oral Rehabilitation, 33(11), 850-862.  
13. Brennan, D. S., & Singh, K. A. (2012). Dietary, self-reported oral health and socio-demographic predictors of general health status among older adults. The Journal of Nutrition, Health & Aging, 16(5), 437-441.

14. Locker, D., & Allen, F. (2007). What do measures of 'oral health-related quality of life' measure? Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0528.2007.00418.x.  
15. World Health Organization (1997). Oral Health Survey. Basic Methods. 4th ed Geneva.  
16. Fleck, M. P. A., Louzada, S., Xavier, M., Chachamovich, E., Vieira, G., Santos, L., et al. (2000). Application of the Portuguese version of the abbreviated instrument for quality of life assessment "WHOQOL-bref". Revista de Saude Pública, 34, 178-183.  
17. Murphy, B., Herrman, H., Hawtrorne, G., Pinzone, T., Evert, H. (2000). Australian WHOQOL-100, WHOQOL-BREF and CA-WHOQOL INTRUMENTS users manual and interpretation guide.  
18. Heatherton, T. F., Kozlowski, L. T., Frecker, R. C., & Fagerstrom, K. O. (1991). The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence: A revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. British Journal of Addiction, 86(9), 1119-1127.  
19. Chobanian, A. V., Bakris, G. L., Black, H. R., Cushman, W. C., Green, L. A., Izzo, J. L., Jr., et al. (2003). The seventh report of the joint national committee on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood pressure: the JNC 7 report. The Journal of the American Medical Association. doi:10.1001/jama.289.19.25650.  
20. World Health Organization (1995). Physical status: The use and interpretation of anthropometry. Geneva: World Health Organization.  
21. Thomson, W. M., Brown, R. H., & Williams, S. M. (1993). Medication and perception of dry mouth in a population of institutionalised older people. New Zealand Medical Journal, 306, 219-221.  
22. Barbato, P. R., Muller Nagano, H. C., Zanchet, F. N., Boing, A. F., & Peres, M. A. (2007). Tooth loss and associated socioeconomic, demographic, and dental-care factors in Brazilian adults: An analysis of the Brazilian Oral Health Survey, 2002-2003. Caderno de Saúde Pública, 23(8), 1803-1814.  
23. Lubetkin, E. I., Jia, H., Franks, P., & Gold, M. R. (2005). Relationship among sociodemographic factors, clinical conditions, and health-related quality of life: Examining the EQ-5D in the U.S. general population. Quality of Life Research, 14(10), 2187-2196.  
24. Slagter, S. N., van Vliet-Ostaptchouk, J. V., van Beek, A. P., Keers, J. C., Lutgers, H. L., van der Klauw, M. M., et al. (2015). Health-related quality of life in relation to obesity grade, type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome and inflammation. PLoS ONE. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0140599.eCollection.  
25. Oluwagbemigun, K., Dietrich, T., Pischon, N., Bergmann, M., & Boeing, H. (2015). Association between number of teeth and chronic systemic diseases: A cohort study followed for 13 years. PLoS ONE. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0123879.

26. Goldenberg, M., Danovitch, I., & IsHak, W. W. (2014). Quality of life and smoking. American Journal of Addiction.. doi:10. 1371/journal.pone.0123879.eCollection.  
27. Hanioka, T., Ojima, M., Tanaka, K., Matsuo, K., Sato, F., & Tanaka, H. (2011). Causal assessment of smoking and tooth loss: A systematic review of observational studies. BMC Public Health. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-11-221.  
28. Wang, T. F., Chou, C., & Yu, S. (2013). Assessing the effects of oral health-related variables on quality of life in Taiwanese adults. *Quality of Life Research*. doi:10.1007/s11136-012-0205-8.  
29. Bland, J. M., & Altman, D. G. (1997). Statistics notes: Cronbach's alpha. British Medical Journal, 314(7080), 572.  
30. Boing, A. C., Peres, K. G., Boing, A. F., Hallal, P. C., Silva, N. N., & Peres, M. A. (2014). EpiFloripa Health Survey: The methodological and operational aspects behind the scenes. *Revista Brasileira de Epidemiologia*, 17(1), 147-162.  
31. Kish, L. (1965). Survey sampling. New York: Wiley.  
32. Fontanine, V., Abegg, C., Tsakos, G., & Oliveira, M. (2013). The association between clinical oral health and general quality of life: A population-based study of individuals aged 50-74 in Southern Brazil. Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0528.2012.00742.  
33. Armellini, D. B., Heydecke, G., Witter, D. J., & Creugers, N. H. (2011). Effect of removable partial dentures on oral health-related quality of life in subjects with shortened dental arches: A 2-center cross-sectional study. International Journal of Prosthodontics, 21(6), 524-530.  
34. Mack, F., Schwahn, C., Feine, J. S., Mundt, T., Bernhardt, O., John, U., et al. (2005). The impact of tooth loss on general health related to quality of life among elderly Pomeranians: Results from the study of health in Pomerania (SHIP-O). International Journal of Prosthodontics, 18(5), 414-419.  
35. Slade, G. D., & Sanders, A. E. (2011). The paradox of better subjective oral health in older age. Journal of Dental Research. doi:10.1177/0022034511421931.  
36. Skevington, S. M., Lotfy, M., O'Connell, K. A., & Group, W. (2004). The World Health Organization's WHOQOL-BREF quality of life assessment: Psychometric properties and results of the international field trial. A report from the WHOQOL group. Quality of Life Research. doi:10.1023/B:QURE.0000018486.91360.00.  
37. Asnani, M. R., Lipps, G. E., & Reid, M. E. (2009). Utility of WHOQOL-BREF in measuring quality of life in sickle cell disease. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes., 7, 75. doi:10.1186/1477-7525-7-75.  
38. Singh, A., Rouxel, P., Watt, R. G., & Tsakos, G. (2013). Social inequalities in clustering of oral health related behaviors in a national sample of British adults. Preventive Medicine. doi:10. 1016/j.ypmed.2013.04.018.
