---
title: "Clinical performance of intentionally tilted implants versus axially positioned implants: A systematic review"
authors:
  - "Wei-Shao Lin"
  - "Steven E. Eckert"
journal: "Clinical Oral Implants Research"
year: 2018
volume: "29"
issue: "S16"
pages: "78-105"
doi: "10.1111/clr.13294"
url: "https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/clr.13294"
source_file: "lin-2018-clinical-performance-of-intentionally-tilted-implants-versus-axially-positioned-implants.md"
---
# Clinical performance of intentionally tilted implants versus axially positioned implants: A systematic review

Wei-Shao Lin $^{1}$  | Steven E. Eckert $^{2,3}$

$^{1}$ Department of Prosthodontics, Indiana University School of Dentistry, Indianapolis, Indiana
2Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota
<sup>3</sup>Director of Research and Clinical Development, ClearChoice Management Services, Greenwood Village, Colorado

# Correspondence

Wei-Shao Lin, Department of Prosthodontics, Indiana University School of Dentistry, 1121 W. Michigan Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5186. Email: weislin@iu.edu

# Abstract

Objectives: The aim of this review was to determine the clinical performance of dental implants that are intentionally tilted when compared with implants that are placed following the long axis of the residual alveolar ridge.

Materials and methods: A systematic review of the scientific literature using a predefined research question (PICO) and search strategy was undertaken. This search included five electronic databases. Two independent reviewers examined electronic databases and performed a manual review following search strategy to accomplish the item generation and reduction. Included articles were evaluated to determine the level of evidence. Data were extracted only from level I and level II studies, based on the Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine—Levels of Evidence (March 2009). If included studies were homogeneous in nature, data were to be accumulated. However, if included studies were heterogeneous in nature, only descriptive data would be reviewed and analyzed.

Results: A total of 811 articles were identified through the PICO question and search strategy. Detailed review of the abstracts and articles resulted in further item reduction, and 46 articles were included for full-text review. A total of 42 articles were then selected for inclusion in the systematic review. The identified articles included two level I and 20 level II studies. In addition, 15 level IV, one gray literature, and four previous systematic reviews with meta-analyses were also used in the study. The extracted data from the included studies demonstrated heterogeneity that prevented quantitative assessment, and only one level II study directly compared tilted and axially placed implants. Assessment of the descriptive data demonstrated no differences in implant survival, marginal bone loss, prosthesis survival, or patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) whether implants are placed axially or with intentional inclination of the coronal aspect of the implant toward the distal aspect of edentulous jaws.

Conclusions: Based upon the systematic review of the literature, an analysis of the descriptive data suggested no differences in clinical performance between implants that are placed in an axial position relative to the residual alveolar ridge when compared with implants that are intentionally tilted toward the distal aspect of edentulous jaws.

# KEYWORDS

clinical assessment, clinical research, clinical trials, diagnosis, prosthodontics tilted, axial

# 1 | INTRODUCTION

Natural teeth are supported in alveolar bone by the periodontal ligament. Most descriptions of the periodontal ligament identify the different supporting fiber groups that maintain the natural tooth in its position within the jaw. Force application to the tooth will create different types of forces within the ligament itself. A vertical force on a natural tooth will cause some of the periodontal ligament fibers to stretch, creating tensile force between the ligament and the surrounding bone while forces applied in an angular fashion will create compressive forces in some areas and tensile forces in other areas within the ligament space (Alhashimi, Frithiof, Brudvik, & Bakhiet, 2001; Feller et al., 2015; Lv et al., 2009).

Dental implants are maintained in bone by direct deposition of mineralized bone on the surface of the dental implant. (Albrektsson & Zarb, 1993; Albrektsson, Zarb, Worthington, & Eriksson, 1986; Branemark, 1983) Although there are areas of fibrous connective tissue that also contact the implant, the predominant structure at the interface of implant and bone is calcified material. As a tissue, bone is far more than simply mineralized structure as it is dependent upon connective tissue, vascular supply and cells that are responsive to the need for osseous remodeling. Without constant bone remodeling, the survival of bone at the surface of an alloplastic device, the dental implant, would be very short-lived.

Dental implants, like natural teeth, also experience complex force applications. It may be reasonable to suggest that the unique configuration of a dental implant, often exhibiting a screw shaped macrostructure and a highly complex microstructure with a series of peaks and valleys related to the manufacturing process and surface treatment of the implant, creates a more complex set of forces than those that are seen on the natural tooth.(Brunski, 1988) Compressive, tensile, and shear forces represent the major categories of force that need to be maintained in a relative equilibrium to achieve and maintain osseointegration (Brænemark, Ohrnell, Skalak, Carlsson, & Brænemark, 1998; Brænemark & Skalak, 1998).

Biomechanical descriptions of stress distribution at the interface of implant and bone demonstrate a different pattern regarding force application to natural teeth. With natural teeth, the goal is to place forces down the long axis of the teeth. With implants, this force application may be somewhat irrelevant because the complex forces of compression, tension, and shear exist macroscopically at each thread of the implant and microscopically at every undulation of the microscopic surface of the implant. Early descriptions of implant placement in such a way as to create axial loading of the implant were derived from theories that were applicable to natural teeth. Over time, some clinicians recognized that efforts to create a vertical osteotomy to house the implant in a similar way to that of the natural teeth were frequently a futile effort. Discussions of slight angulations grew as the recognition that off axis loading of implants was not associated with chronic implant failure. In fact, the form of the residual alveolar ridge, particularly in the anterior maxilla and mandible, is such that it virtually mandates off axial loading for dental implants when placed in those areas.

Immediately placed and restored dental implants were among the earliest descriptions of dental implant usage. Those early descriptions however predated the description of osseointegration and instead utilized implants that were supported by connective tissue. (Schnitman & Shulman, 1980). With the recognition that direct bone to implant contact was possible, a new level of predictability and durability was achieved. (Adell, Lekholm, Rockler, & Brânemark, 1981) The earliest descriptions of osseointegration called for the avoidance of physical contact with any recently placed implant. The thought was that if contact could be eliminated by placing the implant beneath the oral mucosa or through the oral mucosa (Buser, Belser, & Lang, 1998) with relief provided to the tissue surface of the overlying prosthesis, healing of the bone to the implant could occur predictably. The early descriptions of osseointegration were specific relative to the design, at a micro- and macrostructural level, material, surgical technique, and prosthetic technique. (Albrektsson et al., 1986) Those early descriptions recommended an undisturbed healing time of 3–6 months depending upon the anatomic location of implant placement.

Patient response to this somewhat lengthy healing phase was acceptable but fell short of enthusiastic. With time, the microstructure and macrostructure of the implants were modified to allow shorter healing times that thereby allowed earlier functional loading of dental implants. One treatment approach that gained clinical acceptance involved the use of extra implants, more than four or five implants in each jaw, whereby the additional implants would be used to support prostheses until the traditionally distributed four or five implants were allowed to osseointegrate (Balshi & Wolfinger, 1997). Schnitman, Wohrle, & Rubenstein (1990), Schnitman, Wohrle, Rubenstein, DaSilva, & Wang (1997) described this technique and also described anticipation of failure of those extra implants that were used to immediately support the prosthesis. Instead, the survival rate of the immediately loaded implants, at the time of planned loading of the traditionally placed implants, was considered acceptable (Schnitman et al., 1997).

An alternative treatment approach was described by Krekmanov, Kahn, Rangert, & Lindstrom (2000) whereby the distal implants were intentionally tilted in a posterior direction thereby reducing the length of prosthetic cantilevers while still maintaining an optimal number of replacement teeth. The secondary benefit of this treatment approach was to reduce the number of implants that would be necessary to secure a dental prosthesis. The investigators found that both aims were met without any adverse effect on the survival of the implants. Malo, Rangert, & Nobre (2003) combined the use of intentionally tilted posterior implants with a minimal number of implants that were functionally loaded on the day of implant placement. This treatment approach was described as the "all-on-four" technique. The investigations found a high level of predictability for this treatment in both jaws.

With time, different implant manufacturers began to create transmucosal abutments that were at an angle to the central long axis of the implant. (Brosh, Pilo, & Sudai, 1998; Clelland, Lee, Bimbenet, & Brantley, 1995; Kao, Gung, Chung, & Hsu, 2008; Tian et al., 2012)

No consistent scientific studies identified problems with angled abutments. This observation led to an appreciation that intentional nonaxial loading could allow more strategic positioning of implants while taking advantage of the nonaxial positioning of the implant. Anatomic structures could be engaged by tilting implants in such a way as to create more separation between anterior and posterior implants thereby creating a foundation that could support fixed dental prostheses while using fewer dental implants (Krekmanov et al., 2000).

The primary aim of this systematic review of the literature was to determine the clinical performance of dental implants that are intentionally tilted toward distal aspect of edentulous jaws when compared with implants that are placed following the long axis of the residual alveolar ridge, in the edentulous patients. The secondary aim was to determine the biomechanical stability of implant-retained prostheses that depend upon angulated transmucosal abutments to effectively realign the implant with the prosthesis that it supports.

# 2 MATERIALS AND METHODS

A systematic review of the scientific dental implant literature was conducted to address the question of performance of implants that are either loaded through axial forces or through the intentional tilting of the implant for strategic purposes. PRISMA was followed in reporting this systematic review.

The following focused question using the PICO format was developed. In patients who require replacement of all teeth in one or both dental arches using dental implants to support/retain fixed dental prostheses using intentionally tilted or angulated (toward the posterior portion of the mouth) posterior dental implants will be compared to traditionally placed axial dental implants to determine factors and outcomes relating to implant and prosthesis prognosis, biological and prosthesis complications, and patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs). A systematic review was performed using PubMed, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials or EMBASE databases. Gray literature was searched through electronic screening using the New York Academy of Medicine Grey Literature report (http://greylit.org) and through Google Scholar.

Population-based search terms including dental implant, oral implant, endosseous implant, edentulous, immediate load, immediate loading, immediate provisional utilization, or immediate function were used. Considering the intervention that was performed the following terms were used: tilted, angulated, tipped, implant restoration, implant supported prosthesis, implant supported fixed dental prosthesis, implant supported FDP, all on four, or provisional. The comparison group was searched using the terms: vertical, straight, planned, traditional, parallel or axial. The outcomes that were searched were: implant prognosis, implant survival, implant success, prosthetic complications, prosthetic survival, prosthetic success, need for grafting, treatment time, patient satisfaction, clinician satisfaction, provisional, interim or definitive. The complete search strategy was listed in Table 1.

Manual searching was performed of the following journals: Clinical Oral Implants Research, International Journal of Oral Maxillofacial Implants, Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry, Journal of Prosthodontics, and International Journal of Prosthodontics. In addition, personal communications were solicited of authors involved in previous studies for any of these search terms.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria were identified and agreed upon prior to identification of articles for this review. The two authors agreed upon the search terms and search strategy prior to initiation of the study. Upon completion of item generation all titles were reviewed and an initial item reduction was performed based upon study irrelevance. A review of the abstracts associated with each article that was deemed relevant was then performed for the secondary item reduction. The final item reduction occurred after the reading of the full-text articles. Kappa agreement of inter-rater reliability was performed during the item reduction process. Agreement was established through direct communication and discussion of articles. All the included studies were reviewed and determined their levels of evidence. Level I study was defined as individual good quality RCT with narrow confidence interval and systematic review (with homogeneity) of RCTs. Level II study was defined as individual cohort study (including low-quality RCT) and systematic review (with homogeneity) of cohort studies. Level III study was defined as individual case-control study and systematic review (with homogeneity) of case-control studies. Level IV study was defined as case series and poor-quality cohort and case-control studies. Level V study was defined as expert opinion without explicit critical appraisal (Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine, 2009).

Meta-analysis was planned if a sufficient number of homogeneous level I studies were available to address the PICO question. In the event that there were not sufficient numbers of homogeneous level I studies or if all level I studies were heterogeneous in nature the plan was to use descriptive statistics for the available level I studies. Once the level I studies were exhausted the same approach was to be used with level II studies. Any studies that were assessed as levels III or IV would be used for descriptive purposes only or could be used to provide further support or to refute the data obtained from the previous analyses. Likewise, any gray literature that was identified would be used to support or refute the findings from the level I and level II studies.

# 3 | RESULTS

Using the search terms described in the materials and methods a total of 811 articles were identified. Among the 811 articles identified via electronic and hand-search, 765 were excluded with author agreement subsequent to title and abstract review. A total of 46 articles that were identified as particularly relevant to this study design were then assembled for full-text evaluation. Upon the evaluation of the full-text a total of 42 articles were identified (Figure 1).

TABLE 1 Systematic search strategy

<table><tr><td>Focus Question</td><td>In patients who require replacement of all teeth in one or both dental arches using dental implants to support/retain fixed dental prostheses using intentionally tilted or angulated (toward the posterior portion of the mouth) posterior dental implants will be compared to traditionally placed axial dental implants to determine factors and outcomes relating to implant and prosthesis prognosis, biological and prosthesis complications, and patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs).</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Search strategy</td></tr><tr><td>Population</td><td>1. Dental implant [MeSH Terms] OR oral implant OR endosseous implant2. Jaw, Edentulous [MeSH Terms] OR Mouth, Edentulous [MeSH Terms] OR Fully Edentulous OR complete edentulous OR full-arch OR partially edentulous OR partial edentulism OR complete edentulism OR terminal dentition OR failing dentition OR Full Arch3. Immediate load OR Immediate loading OR Immediate provizionalization OR Immediate function</td></tr><tr><td>Intervention or Exposure</td><td>4. tilted OR tipped OR angulated OR tilting OR tipping5. implant restoration OR implant supported prosthesis OR implant supported fixed dental prosthesis OR implant supported FDP OR implant supported FPD OR all-on-four OR all-on-4 OR provisional OR four-implant</td></tr><tr><td>Comparison</td><td>6. vertical OR straight OR planned OR traditional OR parallel OR axial OR upright</td></tr><tr><td>Outcome</td><td>7. implant prognosis OR implant survival OR implant success OR prosthetic complications OR prosthetic survival OR prosthetic success OR need for grafting OR treatment time OR patient satisfaction OR clinician satisfaction OR provisional OR Definitive OR interim</td></tr><tr><td>Search combination</td><td>1 OR 2 OR 3 AND (4 OR 5) AND 6 AND 7</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Database search</td></tr><tr><td>Language</td><td>English</td></tr><tr><td>Electronic database</td><td>PubMed (Medline)Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL)EMBASE</td></tr><tr><td>Manual journal search</td><td>Clinical Oral Implants ResearchInternational Journal of Oral Maxillofacial ImplantsClinical Implant Dentistry and Related ResearchJournal of Oral ImplantologyImplant DentistryJournal of Prosthetic DentistryJournal of ProsthodonticsInternational Journal of ProsthodonticsPersonal communications on Grey Literatures</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Selection criteria</td></tr><tr><td>Inclusion criteria</td><td>Randomized controlled trials (RCT)Nonrandomized studies (NRS)Multicenter studiesPublished between 2003 and 2017Follow-up period of at least 12 monthsHumansAdult (19+)</td></tr><tr><td>Exclusion criteria</td><td>Failure to identify inclusion criteriaMethodology, technique, or review articleMultiple publications on the same patient populationLack of identifiable information specific to prosthodontic proceduresPatient pool of 10 or lessNon-English languageAnimal studiesHistologic or nonclinical outcomesFailure to report treatment outcomes on the dental implants or prostheses</td></tr></table>

Kappa agreement of inter-rater reliability was performed. Cohen's  $\kappa$  was run to determine if there was agreement between the two authors' judgments during the first, second, and final item reduction. During the first item reduction (title review), there was good agreement between the 2 authors' judgments,  $\kappa = 0.8016$  (95% CI, 0.738-0.866). During the second item reduction (abstract review), there was very good agreement between the 2 authors' judgments,  $\kappa = 0.872$  (95% CI, 0.782–0.963). During the final item reduction (full-text review), there was very good agreement between the 2 authors' judgments,  $\kappa = 0.954$  (95% CI, 0.865–1) (Altman, 1991; McHugh, 2012).


The identified articles were then sorted into the different levels of evidence. (Table 2). The Cochrane Collaboration tool was used to
FIGURE 1 Search strategy (PRISMA flow diagram) assess the quality of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) (Table 3), and the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) was used to assess the quality of nonrandomized studies (Table 4). Level I and level II studies were reread and data were extracted from these studies (Tables 5-10). Likewise, the studies were evaluated to determine the final value of these articles to the literature review and data analysis that was drawn from it.


Upon final assessment of 42 articles it was determined that there were two level I studies. (Crespi, Vinci, Capparé, Romanos, & Gherlone, 2012; Tallarico, Meloni, Canullo, Caneva, & Polizzi, 2016) However, these studies did not aim to directly compare tilted to axial implants. One randomized controlled trial compared definitive acrylic resin prostheses with or without a cast metal framework that were immediately loaded and supported by axial and tilted implants. (Crespi et al., 2012) Although this study was not designed specifically to compare the tilted versus axial implants, 3-year overall implant survival rate was reported at  $100\%$  for axially positioned implants and at  $96.59\%$  for tilted implants, with a prosthetic survival rate of  $100\%$ . In addition, no statistically significant differences were found in marginal bone loss between tilted (maxilla:  $1.11 \pm 0.32 \mathrm{~mm}$  and mandible:  $1.12 \pm 0.35 \mathrm{~mm}$ ) and axial implants (maxilla:  $1.10 \pm 0.45 \mathrm{~mm}$  and mandible:  $1.06 \pm 0.41 \mathrm{~mm}$ ) at 3 years ( $p > 0.05$ ). The second randomized controlled trial compared four implants supported prostheses (two axial and two tilted, all-on-4 protocol) to six-implants supported prostheses (all axial implants, all-on-6 group). (Tallarico, Meloni, et al., 2016) It showed that the all-on-6 group underperformed in comparison to the all-on-4 group relative to implant survival while the all-on-4 group exhibited more complications. Neither the numbers of implant failures nor the numbers of complications were statistically significant, and consequently, the performance of the two comparison groups was considered to be statistically equivalent.


Twenty level II studies were evaluated and were likewise heterogeneous in nature. The level II studies that were available on this topic were not specifically focused on the performance of the implants per se but were instead studies that evaluated the targeted number of implants that would be placed per arch. Most studies focused on the clinical performance of four implants placed in the edentulous maxilla or mandible. Only one level II study focused on the direct comparison between axially placed and tilted implants (Krennmair et al., 2016). In this particular 3-year prospective clinical trial, 21 patients with four axially placed implants (axial group: two anterior and two posterior implants) and 20 patients with four implants (tilted group: two anterior axially placed and two distal tilted implants) were all restored with implant supported mandibular full-arch fixed dental prostheses. 37 out of 41 patients (19 patients in the axial group and 18 patients in the tilted group) and 148 out of 164 implants were followed at the 1-, 2-, and 3-year evaluation (dropout rate:  $11.8\%$ ) presenting  $100\%$  implants and prostheses survival rates. The study showed that there were no

TABLE 2 Studies Included for Data Extraction

<table><tr><td>Levels of Evidence</td><td>Numbers</td><td>Studies</td></tr><tr><td>Level I</td><td>2</td><td>Crespi et al. (2012)Tallarico, Meloni et al. (2016)</td></tr><tr><td>Level II</td><td>20</td><td>Capelli et al. (2007)Francetti et al. (2008)Testori et al. (2008)Tealdo et al. (2008)Agliardi et al. (2010)Hinze et al. (2010)Francetti et al. (2012)Grandi et al. (2012)Weinstein et al. (2012)Malo, Nobre, and Lopes (2012)Di et al. (2013)Krennmair et al. (2014)Pera et al. (2014)Browaeks et al. (2015)Gherlone, Ferrini, Crespi, Gastaldi, and Capparé (2015)Ayna et al. (2015)Krennmair et al. (2016)Piano et al. (2016)Najafi et al. (2016)Li et al. (2017)</td></tr><tr><td>Level IV</td><td>15</td><td>Babbush, Kutsko, and Brokloff (2011)Paulo Malo, de Araújo Nobre, Lopes, Moss, and Molina (2011)Butura, Galindo, and Jensen (2011)Galindo and Butura (2012)Cavalli et al. (2012)Maló, de Araújo Nobre, Lopes, Francischone, and Rigolizzo (2012)Krennmair, Seemann, Weinländer, Krennmair, and Piehslinger (2013)Maló, de Araújo Nobre, and Lopes (2013)Thomas J Balshi, Wolfinger, Slauch, and Balshi (2014)Sannino, Bollero, Barlattani, and Gherlone (2015)Tallarico, Canullo, et al. (2016)Sannino and Barlattani (2016)Drago (2016)Niedermaier et al. (2017)Babbush, Kanawati, and Kotsakis (2016)</td></tr><tr><td>Previous Systematic reviews and Meta-Analysis</td><td>4</td><td>Ata-Ali, Peñarrocha-Oltra, Candel-Marti, and Peñarrocha-Diago (2012)Menini et al. (2012)Del Fabbro and Ceresoli (2014)Chrcanovic, Albrektsson, and Wennerberg (2015)</td></tr></table> statistical significant differences between axial and tilted groups regarding clinical implant and prosthesis outcomes, including survival rates, biological and mechanical complications, peri-implant marginal bone resorption, pocket depth, bleeding index and gingival index.


In most studies, the posterior implants were titled toward the distal between 30 and 45 degrees from the long axis of residual ridges, and the dental implants were placed with minimal insertion torque of 30 Ncm. 17 and 30 degrees transmucosal prosthetic abutments were used to align the angulations of prosthetic screw access. Immediate loading protocol with screw-retained provisional resin prostheses was commonly used to provide patients the interim prostheses. The survival rate of tilted implants varied in the included studies, with the lowest reported survival rate at  $89.4\%$  during first 12 months follow-up (Tealdo et al., 2008) to the highest reported survival rate at  $100\%$  during 5 years follow-up (Ayna, Gulses, & Açil, 2015) and  $97.50\%$  at 7 years follow-up (Li, Di, Zhang, & Lin, 2017). In the authors' assessments, there were no differences in the implant survival rates between tilted and axial implants. When comparing the marginal bone loss around the implants, no significant differences were found between tilted and axial implants in most included studies. Although most studies did not report the survival rates for the interim prosthesis,  $100\%$  survival rates of definitive prosthesis were commonly documented. Two studies reported the remake of definitive prosthesis due to the loss of dental implants (Di et al., 2013; Najafi, Siadat, Akbari, & Rokn, 2016).


For the interim prosthesis, the most commonly reported prosthetic complication included fracture of interim prosthesis, (Agliardi, Panigatti, Clerico, Villa, & Malo, 2010; Francetti et al.,

TABLE 3 Risk of Bias for Randomized Controlled Trials by the Cochrane Collaboration's tool. Levels of risk or bias: high, unclear, and low

<table><tr><td>Study</td><td>Random sequence generation (selection bias)</td><td>Allocation concealment (selection bias)</td><td>Blinding of participants and personnel (performance bias)</td><td>Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias) (patient-reported outcomes)</td><td>Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias) (Mortality)</td><td>Incomplete outcome data addressed (attrition bias)</td><td>Selective reporting (reporting bias)</td><td>Other sources of bias</td></tr><tr><td>Crespi et al. (2012)</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td><td>Unclear</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td></tr><tr><td>Tallarico, Meloni, et al., (2016)</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td><td>Unclear</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td></tr></table>

2008; Francetti, Romeo, Corbella, Taschieri, & Del Fabbro, 2012; Grandi, Guazzi, Samarani, & Grandi, 2012; Krennmair, Seemann, Weinlander, Krennmair, & Piehslinger, 2014), screw loosening, (Krennmair et al., 2014; Testori et al., 2008) and fracture of veneering material.(Hinze, Thalmair, Bolz, & Wachtel, 2010; Krennmair et al., 2014) For the definitive prosthesis, the fracture of metal framework was uncommon, and was reported in 2 incidences from 2 articles. (Francetti et al., 2012; Pera et al., 2014) Other most commonly reported complications on definitive prostheses included fracture or wear of veneering material or artificial teeth, the need for readaptation of prosthesis to tissue to compensate for continuing resorption, abutment or prosthetic screw loosening, prosthetic screw fracture, and loss of screw access restoration (Ayna et al., 2015; Di et al., 2013; Francetti et al., 2012; Hinze et al., 2010; Krennmair et al., 2014; Najafi et al., 2016; Pera et al., 2014).

Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) were reported in different studies to demonstrate the overall clinical efficacy when combining anterior axial implants and posterior tilted implants in treating edentulous patients. (Ayna et al., 2015; Capelli, Zuffetti, Del Fabbro, & Testori, 2007; Di et al., 2013; Francetti et al., 2008; Krennmair et al., 2014; Li et al., 2017; Pera et al., 2014; Testori et al., 2008; Weinstein, Agliardi, Fabbro, Romeo, & Francetti, 2012) Patients generally reported satisfactory outcomes regarding aesthetics, phonetics, ease of maintenance, and functional efficiency. However, the survey instruments were greatly varied in different studies, and rarely was a reliable and validated psychometric instrument used to collect these patient-reported outcomes.

One article was identified from the authors knowledge of submitted or planned journal articles. (Eckert, 2017) This article qualified as gray literature. The study was a single cohort study that demonstrated 1,903 implants (Bone Level Tapered implants  $4.1\mathrm{mm}$  or  $3.3\mathrm{mm}$ ; Straumann) placed over a 16-months time period. In this study anterior implants were placed along the axis of the residual ridge and posterior implants were intentionally tilted toward the distal approximately  $30^{\circ}$  or more. The treatment protocol indicated a plan to utilize the minimum number of implants necessary to achieve the immediate loading treatment protocol. The average number of implants placed in the maxilla was 4.3 implants per maxilla while the average number in the mandible was 4.1 implants. Immediate loading protocol was followed after implant surgery with screw-retained acrylic resin prostheses in 440 of 441 planned arches. The mean observation time in this study was 260 days. Of the 1,903 implants that were placed, all but six of the implants received angled abutments. In the posterior, the implants were intentionally tilted to the distal and a  $30^{\circ}$  angled abutment was used to create an apparent screw access opening slightly forward and more vertical than the implant angle would have established. The anterior implants followed the angulation of the alveolar ridge and this resulted in a forward angle of the anterior implant relative to the occlusal plane. In the anterior maxilla,  $30^{\circ}$  angled abutments were required for most implants. In the mandible the majority of the anterior implants were corrected using  $17^{\circ}$  angled abutments. No difference in implant performance, axial vs tilted, was identified. This study also reported no significant differences in implant survival based upon insertion torque.

TABLE 4 Quality assessment and risk of bias for nonrandomized trials by the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Higher scores indicate lower risk of bias in a study

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Study</td><td colspan="4">Selection</td><td>Demonstration that outcome of interest was not present at start of study</td><td colspan="2">Comparability</td><td colspan="3">Outcome</td><td rowspan="2">Total scores (9/9)</td></tr><tr><td>Representativeness of the exposed cohort</td><td>Selection of the nonexposed cohort</td><td>Ascertainment of exposure</td><td>Demonstration that outcome of interest was not present at start of study</td><td>Control for main factor</td><td>Control for additional factor</td><td>Assessment of outcome</td><td>Follow-up long enough for outcomes to occur</td><td>Adequacy of follow-up of cohorts</td><td>Total scores (9/9)</td></tr><tr><td>Capelli et al. (2007)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Francetti et al. (2008)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Testori et al. (2008)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Tealdo et al. (2008)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Agliardi et al. (2010)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Hinze et al. (2010)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Francetti et al. (2012)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Grandi et al. (2012)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Weinstein et al. (2012)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Malo et al. (2012)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Di et al. (2013)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Krennmair et al. (2014)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Pera et al. (2014)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Browaeks et al. (2015)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Gherlone et al. (2015)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ayna et al. (2015)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Krennmair et al. (2016)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Piano et al. (2016)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Najafi et al. (2016)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Li et al. (2017)</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>0</td><td>★</td><td>6</td><td></td></tr></table>

TABLE 5 Study design of the included Level I and Level II studies

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Study level</td><td>Numbers of patients</td><td>Study jaw</td><td>Patient&#x27;s age (years)</td><td>Follow-up duration</td><td>Implants used in the study</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Crespi R</td><td>1</td><td>36 (22 women and 14 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 24 Mandible: 2</td><td>54.6 (range: 41–81)</td><td>3 years</td><td>PAD System; Sweden-Martina</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Tallarico M</td><td>1</td><td>40 (19 women and 21 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 40</td><td>63 (range:42–87)</td><td>5 years (mean of 63.8 months, ranging 60–84 months)</td><td>NobelSpeedy Groovy implants; Nobel Biocare AG</td></tr><tr><td>2007</td><td>Capelli M</td><td>2</td><td>65 (43 women and 22 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 41 Mandible: 24</td><td>59.2 (range: 28–83)</td><td>Up to 52 months</td><td>Osseotite NT; Biomet 3i</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Francetti L</td><td>2</td><td>62 (34 women and 28 men) Assessed—44 patients only</td><td>Mandible: 44</td><td>56 (range: 35–77)</td><td>44 patients follow-up &gt;1 year, (mean of 22.4 months, ranging 6–43 months)</td><td>Brânemark System MK IV NobelSpeedy Groovy</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Testori T</td><td>2</td><td>41 (26 women and 15 men) Assessed—30 patients</td><td>Maxilla: 30</td><td>59.2 ± 9.5 (range 38–84)</td><td>30 patients follow-up &gt;1 year, (mean of 22.1 months, ranging 3–42 months)</td><td>Osseotite NT Implant; Biomet 3i</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Tealdo T</td><td>2</td><td>21 (10 women and 11 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 21</td><td>58</td><td>Mean of 20 months, ranging 13–28 months</td><td>Osseotite and Osseotite NT; Biomet 3i</td></tr><tr><td>2010</td><td>Agliardi E</td><td>2</td><td>173 (93 women and 80 men) Assessed—154 patients</td><td>Enrolled: Maxilla: 72 Mandible: 101 Assessed: Maxilla: 61 Mandible: 93</td><td>57.3 ± 8.5 (range 42–74)</td><td>154 patients follow-up &gt;1 year. Maxilla: mean of 26.9 ± 12.5 months, ranging 12–55 months Mandible: mean of 31.3 ± 14 months, ranging 12–59 months</td><td>Brânemark Systems MKIV: 92 NobelSpeedy Groovy: 404</td></tr><tr><td>2010</td><td>Hinze M</td><td>2</td><td>37 (19 women and 18 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 19 Mandible: 18</td><td>64.6 (range 39–84)</td><td>1 year</td><td>NanoTite Tapered Implants; Biomet 3i</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Francetti L</td><td>2</td><td>47 (22 women and 25 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 16 Mandible: 33</td><td>53 (range 44–63)</td><td>Maxilla: mean of 33.8 months, ranging 22–40 months Mandible: mean of 52.8 months, ranging months 30–66 months</td><td>Brânemark System MK IV: 92 NobelSpeedy Groovy: 104</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Grandi T</td><td>2</td><td>47 (25 women and 22 men)</td><td>Mandible: 47</td><td>62.3 ± 9.4 (range 52–78)</td><td>18 months</td><td>Tapered implants (JDEVolution, JDentalCare, Modena, Italy)</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Weinstein R</td><td>2</td><td>20 (12 women and 8 men)</td><td>Mandible: 20</td><td>60.8 ± 8.8 (range 44–77)</td><td>Mean of 30.1 ± 8.6 months, ranging 20–48 months,</td><td>Brânemark System MKIV: 12 NobelSpeedy Groovy: 68 (Continues)</td></tr></table>

TABLE 5 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Study level</td><td>Numbers of patients</td><td>Study jaw</td><td>Patient&#x27;s age (years)</td><td>Follow-up duration</td><td>Implants used in the study</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Maló P</td><td>2</td><td>142 (86 women and 56 men)</td><td></td><td>53.7 (range 20-78)</td><td>Mean of 26 months, ranging 1-107 months.</td><td>MkIII implant (Nobel Biocare) MkIV implant (Nobel Biocare) NobelSpeedy implant (Nobel Biocare)</td></tr><tr><td>2013</td><td>Di P</td><td>2</td><td>69 (32 women and 37 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 38 Mandible: 48</td><td>56.78 (range 37-74)</td><td>Mean of 33.7 months, ranging 12-56 months,</td><td>Brànemark Mk III: 52 NobelSpeedy Groovy: 292 (TiUnite, Nobel Biocare).</td></tr><tr><td>2014</td><td>Krennmair S</td><td>2</td><td>24 (10 women and 14 men)</td><td>Mandible: 24</td><td>61.5 ± 11.9 (range 38-84)</td><td>24 months</td><td>Camlog; Screw-Line Promote plus; Wimsheim, Germany</td></tr><tr><td>2014</td><td>Pera P</td><td>2</td><td>37 (20 women and 17 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 37</td><td>55.1 (range 43-71)</td><td>Mean of 72.5 months, ranging 72-76 months,</td><td>Osseotite; Biomet 3i: 56 Full Osseotite; Biomet 3i: 108</td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>Browaeys H</td><td>2</td><td>20 (14 women and 6 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 9 Mandible: 11</td><td>55 (range 35-74)</td><td>3 years</td><td>Mk III Groovy: for mandible, n = 44 Nobel Speedy Groovy: for maxilla, n = 44</td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>Gherlone EF</td><td>2</td><td>14 (8 women and 6 men)</td><td>Maxillae: 6 Mandible: 8</td><td>56.3 (range 43-80)</td><td>12 months</td><td>Winsix; BioSAFin, Ancona, Italy</td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>Ayna M</td><td>2</td><td>27 (19 women and 8 men)</td><td>Mandible: 27</td><td>64.4 ± 10.8 (range 43-77)</td><td>5 years</td><td>Nobel Speedy</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Krennmair S</td><td>2</td><td>37 Axial group: 19 (12 women and 7 men) Tilted group: 18 (10 women and 8 men)</td><td>Mandible: 37</td><td>Axial Group 66.7 ± 9.6 (range 43-84) Tilted Group 62.6 ± 9.7 (range 42-77)</td><td>3 years</td><td>Camlog; Screw-line, Promote, Wimsheim</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Piano S</td><td>2</td><td>21</td><td>Maxilla</td><td>66 years (range 56-81 years)</td><td>2 years</td><td>Straumann SLActive Bone Level implants</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Najafi H</td><td>2</td><td>30 (14 women and 16 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 14 Mandible: 25</td><td>59.3 ± 11.7 (range 28-89)</td><td>32.5 ± 13.6 months</td><td>Brànemark System MKIII or MKIV Nobel Speedy Groovy Nobel Replace selec</td></tr><tr><td>2017</td><td>Li S</td><td>2</td><td>17 (7 women and 10 men)</td><td>Maxilla: 7 Mandible: 13</td><td>39.4 (range 28-45)</td><td>Mean of 5 years, ranging 2-7 years</td><td>Brànemark System MK III: 44 Nobel Speedy Groovy: 8 Nobel Active: 28</td></tr></table>

(Continues)

TABLE 6 Surgical and prosthetic protocol used in the included Level I and Level II studies

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Total implants placed</td><td>Tilted implants placed</td><td>Axial implant placed</td><td>Tilted implant inclination (degrees)</td><td>Implant insertion torques (Ncm)</td><td>Loading protocol</td><td>Abutment angles</td><td>Definitive prosthesis loading at</td><td>Prosthesis design</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Crespi R</td><td>176</td><td>Maxilla: 48 Mandible: 40</td><td>Maxilla: 48 Mandible: 40</td><td>Mandible: 30°-35° Maxilla: 30°-35°</td><td>&gt;40</td><td>Immediate</td><td>Anterior Implant: 17° Posterior implant: 30°</td><td>24 hr</td><td>Screw-retained acrylic resin prosthesis: 21 Screw-retained cast metal-frame prosthesis: 23</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Tallarico M</td><td>200All-on-4: 80All-on-6: 120</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>35-45</td><td>Immediate</td><td>Distal: 17° or 30° Mesial: 0° or to implant level</td><td>Patient returned for impression at 4 months and delivery at 5 months.</td><td>Definitive prosthesis with CAD/CAM titanium or zirconia frameworks and layered with either pink and/or white material (not specified).</td></tr><tr><td>2007</td><td>Capelli M</td><td>342Maxilla: 246 Mandible: 96</td><td>130Maxillary: 82 Mandible: 48</td><td>212Maxillary: 164 Mandible: 48</td><td>Maxilla: 30°-35° Mandible: 25°-35°</td><td>30-50</td><td>Immediate</td><td>If implant inclination exceeded 30 degrees, angulated abutments were used.</td><td>3 months</td><td>Complete full-arch prostheses were fabricated with a titanium framework combined with new acrylic resin teeth composed of 12 elements</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Francetti L</td><td>248</td><td>124</td><td>124</td><td>30°</td><td>40-50</td><td>Acrylic temporary prosthesis with 10 teeth was delivered within 48 hr</td><td>Distal: 30° Mesial: Straight</td><td>After 4-6 months</td><td>CAD-CAM Procera system</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2008</td><td rowspan="2">Testori T</td><td rowspan="2">246</td><td rowspan="2">82</td><td rowspan="2">164</td><td rowspan="2">30°-35°</td><td rowspan="2">30</td><td>Immediate</td><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">3 months</td><td rowspan="2">Seven Screw-retained, fabricated with a titanium framework (CRESCO Astra Tech Implant System) with acrylic resin teeth; the remaining 33 prostheses were porcelain-cemented restorations with a cast mesiostruc-ture connecting all the implants on each side.</td></tr><tr><td>The provisional screw-retained prosthesis was delivered within 48 h from surgery using temporary provisional cylinders with fiber-reinforced acrylic teeth.</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Tealdo T</td><td>111</td><td>47</td><td>64</td><td></td><td>&gt;40</td><td>Immediate</td><td>Conical abutments (0°, 17°, 25°, and 45°)</td><td>18 weeks</td><td>All of the definitive prostheses consisted of palladium-alloy frameworks; the occlusal surfaces were designed completely in porcelain or acrylic resin artificial teeth. All of the definitive prostheses were screw retained.</td></tr></table>

TABLE 6 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Total implants placed</td><td>Tilted implants placed</td><td>Axial implant placed</td><td>Tilted implant inclination (degrees)</td><td>Implant insertion torques (Ncm)</td><td>Loading protocol</td><td>Abutment angles</td><td>Definitive prosthesis loading at</td><td>Prosthesis design</td></tr><tr><td>2010</td><td>Agliardi E</td><td>692</td><td>346</td><td>346</td><td>Maxilla: 30°-45° Mandible: 30°</td><td>&gt;30</td><td>Immediate Acrylic provisional prosthesis</td><td>Maxilla: Distal: 30° (n = 144) Mesial: 0° (n = 127) 17° (n = 20) Mandible: Distal: 30° (n = 202) Mesial: 0° (n = 202)</td><td>4-6 months</td><td>CAD-CAM Proceras System (Nobel Biocare, Stockholm, Sweden)</td></tr><tr><td>2010</td><td>Hinze M</td><td>148 Maxilla: 76 Mandible: 72</td><td>74</td><td>74</td><td>30°</td><td>&gt;30</td><td>Immediate Within 24 hr, 10 units screw-retained full-arch acrylic resin provisional restorations.</td><td></td><td>6 months</td><td>Complete full-arch prostheses were supported by metal frameworks combined with high-density acrylic resin.</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Francetti L</td><td>196 Maxilla: 64 Mandible: 132</td><td>98</td><td>98</td><td>30°</td><td>40-50</td><td>Immediate An acrylic temporary prosthesis with 10 teeth was delivered within 48 hr of implant placement.</td><td>Distal: 30° Mesial: 0°</td><td>4-6 months</td><td>CAD-CAM Proceras system and consisting of 12 teeth</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Grandi T</td><td>188</td><td>94</td><td>94</td><td></td><td>&gt;45</td><td>Immediate 10-unit screw- retained, provisional fixed dental prosthesis with a metal framework (nonprecious alloy) within 48 hr after surgery</td><td>Distal: 30° (n = 94) Mesial: 0° (n = 82) 17° (n = 12)</td><td>6 months</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Weinstein R</td><td>80</td><td>40</td><td>40</td><td>30°</td><td>50</td><td>Immediate An acrylic temporary prosthesis with 10 teeth was delivered within 48 hr of surgery with centric and lateral contacts limited at the intercanine zone.</td><td>Distal: 17° or 30° Mesial: 0°</td><td>4-6 months</td><td>CAD-CAM Proceras system (Nobel Biocare AB).</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Maló P</td><td>227 Maxilla: 133 Mandibule: 94</td><td></td><td></td><td>Maxilla: up to 45° Mandible: 30°-45°</td><td>35</td><td>Immediate A high-density acrylic resin prosthesis with titanium cylinders was manufactured at the dental laboratory and inserted on the same day, usually 2-3 hr postsurgically.</td><td>Distal: 30° Mesial: 0°, 17° or 30°</td><td>6 months</td><td>Depending on patient desires, the definitive prosthesis featured either a titanium framework and all-ceramic crowns or a titanium framework and acrylic resin prosthetic teeth. (Continues)</td></tr></table>

TABLE 6 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Total implants placed</td><td>Tilted implants placed</td><td>Axial implant placed</td><td>Tilted implant inclination (degrees)</td><td>Implant insertion torques (Ncm)</td><td>Loading protocol</td><td>Abutment angles</td><td>Definitive prosthesis loading at</td><td>Prosthesis design</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2013</td><td rowspan="2">Di P</td><td rowspan="2">344</td><td rowspan="2">172</td><td rowspan="2">172</td><td rowspan="2">Maxilla: up to 45°</td><td rowspan="2">&gt;35 N</td><td>Immediate</td><td>0° (n = 113)</td><td rowspan="2">6 months</td><td rowspan="2">12 acrylic resin teeth units with a metal framework</td></tr><tr><td>10-12 units interim all acrylic prostheses (without metal frameworks) delivered approximately 6 hr after implant placement.</td><td>17° or 30° (n = 231)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">2014</td><td rowspan="3">Krennmair S</td><td rowspan="3">96</td><td rowspan="3">48</td><td rowspan="3">48</td><td rowspan="3"></td><td rowspan="3">&gt;30</td><td>Immediate</td><td>Distal: 30° (n = 12)</td><td rowspan="3">3 months</td><td rowspan="3">Cobalt-chromium screw-retained prostheses. All prostheses consisted of 12 acrylic veneering (1 molar per side) with the extension varying in size.</td></tr><tr><td>A simple metal bar was connected to the copings to obtain reinforcement of the interim prostheses, and they were inserted within 24 hr.</td><td>20° (n = 36)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mesial: 0° (n = 48)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2014</td><td rowspan="2">Pera P</td><td rowspan="2">164</td><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">&gt;40</td><td>Immediate</td><td>Distal: 17°, 25°, 30°</td><td rowspan="2">4 months</td><td rowspan="2">Metal framework with acrylic resin or a microfilled hybrid composite resin</td></tr><tr><td>The screw-retained provisional prostheses with metal frameworks were placed within 24-36 hr of the surgery.</td><td>0°; n = 6</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2015</td><td rowspan="2">Broweys H</td><td rowspan="2">80</td><td rowspan="2">40</td><td rowspan="2">40</td><td rowspan="2">Between 20° and 40°</td><td rowspan="2">&lt; 50</td><td rowspan="2">Immediate. Within 48 hr, the 10-unit provisional resin-based prosthesis was delivered and installed in the mouth</td><td>0°; n = 6</td><td rowspan="2">3-4 months</td><td rowspan="2">The final prosthetic work was performed by the referring dentist, but no other details provided.</td></tr><tr><td>Mesial: 0°</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2015</td><td rowspan="2">Gherlone EF</td><td rowspan="2">56</td><td rowspan="2">28</td><td rowspan="2">28</td><td rowspan="2">30° to 35°</td><td rowspan="2">&gt;40</td><td>Immediate</td><td>Distal: 30°</td><td>4 months</td><td rowspan="2">Definitive prostheses were made by acrylic resin masticatory surfaces and metal frameworks for increased strength and rigidity</td></tr><tr><td>5 hr after implant placement, screw-retained full-arch interim prosthesis by only all acrylic resin frameworks were positioned.</td><td>Mesial: 17°</td><td>A digital scan body was used to finalize definitive prosthesis. (Lava COS; 3M)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2015</td><td rowspan="2">Ayna M</td><td rowspan="2">108</td><td rowspan="2">54</td><td rowspan="2">54</td><td rowspan="2">45°</td><td rowspan="2">&gt;35</td><td>Immediate</td><td>Distal: 30°</td><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">The patients were assigned to the different groups (ceramics/ acrylic) according to their own choice. (14 acrylic, and 13 ceramics)</td></tr><tr><td>All implants were immediately loaded within 24 hr.</td><td>Mesial: 0°</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Krennmair S</td><td>148</td><td>36</td><td>112</td><td></td><td>&gt;30</td><td>Conventional loading Patient returned for impression and uncovering at 2 months.</td><td>Axial implant: 0 degree Tilted implant:20° and 30°</td><td>Patient returned for impression and uncovering at 2 months.</td><td>Screw-retained Cobalt-Chromium acrylic resin prosthesis. All prostheses consisted 12 acrylic veneering. (Continues)</td></tr></table>

TABLE 6 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Total implants placed</td><td>Tilted implants placed</td><td>Axial implant placed</td><td>Tilted implant inclination (degrees)</td><td>Implant insertion torques (Ncm)</td><td>Loading protocol</td><td>Abutment angles</td><td>Definitive prosthesis loading at</td><td>Prosthesis design</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Piano S</td><td>84</td><td>42</td><td>42</td><td>≤30°</td><td>&gt;25</td><td>Immediate The framework was created by laser welding the titanium copings to the preproduced CAD/CAM titanium bars, and acrylic resin was used for the overdenture veneering. 12-14 units. Delivered within 48 hr.</td><td>Distal: 0° (n = 22) 25° (n = 16) Mesial: 0° (n = 26) 25° (n = 20)</td><td>3 months</td><td>After 3 months, the interim prostheses were refined, if any soft tissues remodeling occurred. Acrylic resin was used for prosthesis relining. A direct resin addition technique was performed.</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Najafi H</td><td>156</td><td>78 Maxillae: 28 Mandible: 50</td><td>78 Maxillae: 28 Mandible: 50</td><td>45°</td><td>≥35 Ncm for the immediate loading group &lt;35 Ncm for delayed group</td><td>Immediate group: On the third day after surgery, the final metal resin prosthesis was delivered Delayed group : During the second surgery, which was carried out after four months, the abutments were connected and the remaining prosthetic procedures were the same as those in the IL group</td><td>Distal: 30° Mesial: 0°</td><td></td><td>It appeared that authors used the original interim as the definitive prosthesis.</td></tr><tr><td>2017</td><td>Li S</td><td>80</td><td>40</td><td>40</td><td>30°-40°</td><td>35-45</td><td>Immediate 10-12 units heat-cured acrylic resin prostheses without metal frameworks were delivered to the patients approximately 6 hr after surgery.</td><td>Distal: 17° or 30° Mesial: 0°, 17° or 30°</td><td>4-6 months</td><td>High-precision CAM metal framework with a wrap-around heat-cured acrylic resin, as well as 12 acrylic resin teeth units, or all-ceramic crown units</td></tr></table>

TABLE 7 Implant outcomes in the included Level I and Level II studies

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Overall implant survival</td><td>Percentages of surviving tilted implants</td><td>Percentages of surviving axial implants</td><td>Implant survival differences</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on all implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on tilted implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on axial implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss differences</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2012</td><td rowspan="2">Crespi R</td><td>3 years</td><td>3 years</td><td>3 years</td><td></td><td></td><td>At 1 year: Maxilla: 1.05 ± 0.29 Mandible: 1.05 ± 0.32</td><td>At 1 year: Maxilla: 1.10 ± 0.35 Mandible: 1.04 ± 0.30 At 2 year: Maxilla: 1.08 ± 0.41 Mandible: 1.04 ± 0.35</td><td>No statistically significant differences (p &gt; 0.05) in crestal bone loss were found in either arch between tilted and axial implants at 12, 24, and 36 months.</td></tr><tr><td>Maxilla: 98.96% Mandible: 97.5%</td><td>Maxilla: 97.97% Mandible: 95% Overall: 96.59%</td><td>Maxilla: 100% Mandible: 100%</td><td></td><td></td><td>At 2 year: Maxilla: 1.07 ± 0.46 Mandible: 1.09 ± 0.29</td><td>At 3 years: Maxilla: 1.10 ± 0.45 Mandible: 1.06 ± 0.41</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2016</td><td rowspan="2">Tallarico M</td><td>5 years</td><td></td><td></td><td>Not statistically significant differences (p = 0.246) between All-on-4 and All-on-6 groups</td><td>5-year</td><td></td><td></td><td>Not statistically different between All-on-4 and All-on-6 groups at 5 years. (p = 0.117)</td></tr><tr><td>All-on-6: 95% All-on-4: 98.75%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>All-on-4: 1.7 ± 0.42 All-on-6: 1.51 ± 0.36</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">2007</td><td rowspan="3">Capelli M</td><td rowspan="2">Maxillary: 97.59% up to 40 months (mean follow-up, 22.5 months)</td><td>3 years</td><td>3 years</td><td></td><td></td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td>No significant difference in crestal bone loss between tilted and upright implants was detected at the 12-month follow-up evaluation in either jaw.</td></tr><tr><td>98.46%</td><td>98.58%</td><td></td><td></td><td>Maxillary: 0.88 ± 0.59 (n = 42 implants)</td><td>Maxillary: 0.95 ± 0.44 (n = 84 implants) Mandible: 0.82 ± 0.64 mm (n = 32 implants)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Mandibular: 100% with up to 52 months of follow-up (mean follow-up, 29.1 months).</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Mandible: 0.75 ± 0.55 mm (n = 32 implants)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2008</td><td rowspan="2">Francetti L</td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td></td><td></td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td>No significant difference in marginal bone loss was found between tilted and axial implants at 1-year evaluation.</td></tr><tr><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.7 ± 0.5</td><td>0.7 ± 0.4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2008</td><td rowspan="2">Testori T</td><td>3 year</td><td>3 year</td><td>3 year</td><td></td><td></td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td>Marginal bone loss around axial and tilted implants at 12-month evaluation was similar</td></tr><tr><td>97.58%</td><td>97.10%</td><td>97.90%</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.8 ± 0.5</td><td>0.9 ± 0.4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2008</td><td rowspan="2">Tealdo T</td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td>No statistically significant differences between tilted and axial implants</td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>92.8%</td><td>89.40%</td><td>95.30%</td><td></td><td>0.84</td><td>Mesial: 0.92 Distal: 1.04</td><td>Mesial: 0.62 Distal: 0.86</td><td></td></tr></table>

(Continues)

TABLE 7 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Overall implant survival</td><td>Percentages of surviving tilted implants</td><td>Percentages of surviving axial implants</td><td>Implant survival differences</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on all implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on tilted implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on axial implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss differences</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">2010</td><td rowspan="4">Agliardi E</td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td></td><td>1 year</td><td></td><td></td><td rowspan="4">No significant differences in bone loss were found between axially placed and tilted implants.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Maxilla: 98.4% Mandible: 99.7%</td><td rowspan="3">99.70%</td><td rowspan="3">98.84%</td><td></td><td>Maxilla: 0.9 ± 0.7 (n = 204 implants)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mandible: 1.2 ± 0.9 (n = 292 implants)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Such difference was not statistically significant.</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2010</td><td rowspan="2">Hinze M</td><td>1 Year</td><td>1 Year</td><td>1 Year</td><td rowspan="2">No significant differences in bone loss were found between axially placed and tilted implants.</td><td></td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td rowspan="2">No significant differences in bone loss were found between axially placed and tilted implants.</td></tr><tr><td>Maxilla: 96.6% Mandible: 98.7%</td><td>94.60%</td><td>96%</td><td></td><td>0.76 ± 0.49</td><td>0.82 ± 0.31</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2012</td><td rowspan="2">Francetti L</td><td rowspan="2">100%</td><td rowspan="2">100%</td><td rowspan="2">100%</td><td></td><td></td><td>Mandible: 6 m: 0.47 ± 0.22 12 m: 0.48 ± 0.23 18 m: 0.64 ± 0.37 24 m: 0.67 ± 0.38 36 m: 0.69 ± 0.52 48 m: 0.81 ± 0.40 60 m: 0.39 ± 0.18</td><td>Mandible: 6 m: 0.52 ± 0.22 12 m: 0.57 ± 0.42 18 m: 0.67 ± 0.35 24 m: 0.90 ± 0.49 36 m: 0.92 ± 0.43 48 m: 0.92 ± 0.55 60 m: 0.51 ± 0.17</td><td rowspan="2">No significant difference in marginal bone loss was found between axial and tilted implants; and between mandible and maxilla, at each comparable time frame.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Maxilla: 6 m: 0.35 ± 0.27 12 m: 0.32 ± 0.28 18 m: 0.72 ± 0.23 24 m: 0.63 ± 0.38 36 m: 0.85 ± 0.34</td><td>Maxilla: 6 m: 0.38 ± 0.34 12 m: 0.40 ± 0.27 18 m: 0.61 ± 0.49 24 m: 0.44 ± 0.37 36 m: 0.85 ± 0.74</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2012</td><td rowspan="2">Grandi T</td><td>18 months</td><td>18 months</td><td>18 months</td><td></td><td>6 m: 0.31 ± 0.12 12 m: 0.58 ± 0.11</td><td>6 m: 0.36 ± 0.14 12 m: 0.6 ± 0.16</td><td>6 m: 0.27 ± 0.17 12 m: 0.57 ± 0.13</td><td rowspan="2">No significant differences in bone loss were found between axially placed and tilted implants at the 6-month, the 12-month and the 18-month follow-up</td></tr><tr><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td>18 m: 0.7 ± 0.11</td><td>18 m: 0.74 ± 0.14</td><td>18 m: 0.68 ± 0.14</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2012</td><td rowspan="2">Weinstein R</td><td>1 Year</td><td>1 Year</td><td>1 Year</td><td></td><td></td><td>1 Year: 0.7 ± 0.4 (n = 36 implants)</td><td>1 Year: 0.6 ± 0.3 (n = 36 implants)</td><td rowspan="2">Marginal bone loss around axial and tilted implants was similar at 12-month evaluation. Such difference was not statistically significant (p &gt; 0.05)</td></tr><tr><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">2012</td><td rowspan="3">Malò P</td><td>2-year estimate Maxilla: 97.7%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1 year: Maxilla: 1.3 ± 0.4 Mandible: 1.4 ± 0.3</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3 Year estimate Mandible: 94.8%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>3 year: Maxilla: 1.6 ± 0.4</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>5 year: Mandible: 1.7 ± 0.6</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

(Continues)

TABLE 7 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Overall implant survival</td><td>Percentages of surviving tilted implants</td><td>Percentages of surviving axial implants</td><td>Implant survival differences</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on all implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on tilted implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on axial implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss differences</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2013</td><td rowspan="2">Di P</td><td>56 months</td><td>56 months</td><td>56 months</td><td rowspan="2">The implant survival rate was significantly elevated in mandibular versus maxillary implants</td><td></td><td>56 months</td><td>56 months</td><td rowspan="2">Marginal bone level changes were statistically similar on the upright and the tilted implants</td></tr><tr><td>Overall: 96.2% Maxilla: 92.8% Mandible: 99.0%</td><td>93.60%</td><td>98.83%</td><td></td><td>0.8 ± 0.4</td><td>0.7 ± 0.2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">2014</td><td rowspan="3">Krennair S</td><td>2 years</td><td>2 years</td><td>2 years</td><td></td><td>12 m: 0.18 ± 0.20</td><td>1 year: 1.14</td><td>1 year: 1.01 ± 0.75</td><td>No significant differences in bone loss were found in tilted versus upright implants.</td></tr><tr><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td>24 m: 0.40 ± 0.29</td><td>6 year: 1.52</td><td>3 year: 1.32 ± 1.20</td><td>1 year: 1.24 ± 0.90</td></tr><tr><td>97.58%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>6 year: 1.44 ± 1.24</td><td>3 year: 1.51 ± 1.22</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2015</td><td rowspan="2">Broweys H</td><td>3 years</td><td>3 years</td><td>3 years</td><td></td><td>61 implants (out of 80) were taken into account for statistical analysis of bone level changes:</td><td>1 year: 1.14 ± 1.14</td><td>1 year: 1.13 ± 0.71</td><td>This difference was statistically significant (p &lt; 0.001) between 1 year and 3 years follow-up, indicative of ongoing bone loss</td></tr><tr><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td>1 year: 1.13 ± 0.94</td><td>3 years: 1.61 ± 1.40</td><td>3 years: 1.55 ± 0.73</td><td>Bone loss was not significantly different between straight and tilted implants (p = 0.605) after 3 years</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2015</td><td rowspan="2">Gherlone EF</td><td>12 months</td><td>12 months</td><td>12 months</td><td></td><td></td><td>12 months</td><td>12 months</td><td>No statistically significant differences (p &gt; 0.05) in crestal bone loss between tilted and upright implants was detected at 12-month follow-up evaluation in either jaws.</td></tr><tr><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td></td><td>Maxilla: 1.07 ± 0.81 Mandible: 1.10 ± 0.89</td><td>Maxilla: 1.07 ± 0.99 Mandible: 1.02 ± 0.72</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">2015</td><td rowspan="3">Ayna M</td><td>5 Years</td><td>5 Years</td><td>5 Years</td><td></td><td></td><td>1 year</td><td>1 year</td><td>Bone loss was significantly more pronounced around the distal implants (regions 35 and 45), with the differences amounting to a factor of 2–3 (p &lt; 0.0001 throughout).</td></tr><tr><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td></td><td>region 35: 0.89 ± 0.11 region 45: 0.93 ± 0.13</td><td>region 32: 0.47 ± 0.14 region 42: 0.52 ± 0.11</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>5 Year region 35: 1.24 ± 0.13 region 45: 1.30 ± 0.13</td><td>5 Year region 32: 0.78 ± 0.10 region 42: 0.78 ± 0.10</td><td></td></tr></table>

(Continues)

TABLE 7 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Overall implant survival</td><td>Percentages of surviving tilted implants</td><td>Percentages of surviving axial implants</td><td>Implant survival differences</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on all implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on tilted implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss (mean ± SD) (mm) on axial implants</td><td>Marginal bone loss differences</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="7">2016</td><td rowspan="7">Krennmair S</td><td>3 years</td><td>3 years</td><td>3 years</td><td></td><td>1 year: 1.11 ± 0.42 year: 1.26 ± 0.42</td><td>Tilted Group</td><td>Axial Group</td><td rowspan="7">There were also no differences for marginal bone reduction for posterior and for anterior implants (region) comparing between axial group and tilted group. The time effect proved as statistically relevant for marginal bone reduction in anterior and posterior region (p &lt; 0.01).</td></tr><tr><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td>3 year: 1.40 ± 0.41</td><td>At 1 year: Posterior implant 1.0 ± 0.5</td><td>At 1 year: Anterior: 1.1 ± 0.4 Posterior: 1.1 ± 0.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>At 2 year Posterior implant 1.2 ± 0.5</td><td>At 2 year: Anterior: 1.3 ± 0.3 Posterior: 1.2 ± 0.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>At 3 years Posterior implant 1.4 ± 0.4</td><td>At 3 years: Anterior 1.4 ± 0.4 Posterior 1.4 ± 0.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Tilted Group At 1 year: Anterior: 1.2 ± 0.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>At 2 year: Anterior: 1.4 ± 0.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>At 3 years: Anterior 1.5 ± 0.5</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2016</td><td rowspan="2">Piano S</td><td>2 years</td><td>2 years</td><td>2 years</td><td></td><td>2 years</td><td>2 years</td><td>2 years</td><td rowspan="2">No significant difference between mean marginal bone loss of anterior and posterior implants was found (p = 0.89).</td></tr><tr><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td>0.34 ± 0.45</td><td>0.34 ± 0.46</td><td>0.35 ± 0.44</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2016</td><td rowspan="2">Najafi H</td><td>13 months delayed: 99% immediate: 100%</td><td>13 months</td><td>13 months</td><td></td><td>13 months: Maxilla: 0.88 ± 0.17 Mandible: 0.81 ± 0.2</td><td>13 months</td><td>13 months</td><td rowspan="2">No statistically significant difference was observed between the mean marginal bone loss of axial and tilted implants (p &gt; 0.05), maxillary and mandibular implants (p &gt; 0.05), or immediately loaded and delayed loaded groups (p &gt; 0.05).</td></tr><tr><td>Maxilla: 98.2% Mandible: 100%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Delayed Loading: 0.81 ± 0.16 Immediate Loading: 0.87 ± 0.25</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2017</td><td rowspan="2">Li S</td><td>7 years</td><td>7 years</td><td>7 years</td><td></td><td>1 year: 0.8 ± 0.47 year: 1.2 ± 0.3</td><td>1 year: 0.9 ± 0.43 year: 0.9 ± 0.45 year: 1.1 ± 0.47 year: 1.2 ± 0.4</td><td>1 year: 0.8 ± 0.43 year: 0.9 ± 0.45 year: 1.0 ± 0.37 year: 1.2 ± 0.3</td><td>No statistical difference in all follow-ups (p &gt; 0.05)</td></tr><tr><td>98.75%</td><td>97.50%</td><td>100%</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

TABLE 8 Prosthesis survival in the included Level I and Level II studies

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Prosthesis survival</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Crespi R</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Tallarico M</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2007</td><td>Capelli M</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Francetti L</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Testori T</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Tealdo T</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2010</td><td>Hinze M</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Francetti L</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Grandi T</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Malò P</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2013</td><td>Di P</td><td>96.5% (Due to the loss of 2 implants at the same side in 3 patients)</td></tr><tr><td>2014</td><td>Krennmair S</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2014</td><td>Pera P</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>Browaeks H</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>Gherlone EF</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>Ayna M</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Krennmair S</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Piano S</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Najafi H</td><td>96.1% for the delayed loading group100% for the immediate loading group92.2% for the maxillary group100% for the mandibular group</td></tr><tr><td>2017</td><td>Li S</td><td>100% (20/20) for definitive prostheses85% (17/20) for provisional prostheses</td></tr></table>

# 4 | DISCUSSION

The current systematic review was conducted to determine the clinical performance of intentionally tilted implants versus axially positioned implants. During the item reduction process, inter-rater reliabilities (Cohen's  $\kappa$ ) were calculated to measure agreement among the two data collectors. Substantial inter-rater agreements were obtained in the different stages of item reduction process, indicating high degree of agreement between two authors in the identification process for included studies. Based on the evaluation criteria in a previous systematic review, RCTs were assessed with the Cochrane Collaboration's tool. Articles were judged to be at low risk of bias if there was adequate sequence generation, allocation concealment and blinding, and if one or more criteria were not met, then the study would be determined at high risk of bias. For the nonrandomized studies, the studies were considered at low risk of bias in the case of Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) scores of 7 stars or higher. (Soto-Penaloza, Zaragozí-Alonso, Peñarrocha-Diago, & Peñarrocha-Diago, 2017) Among all the studies evaluated, both level I studies and 12 out of 20 level II studies showed high risk of bias (Tables 3 and 4).


The results of this study indicate that the implants that are generally described as "titled" are the distal implants whereas the implants that are described as axially placed and loaded are located in the anterior portions of the jaw. With the intentionally titled implant being located in the posterior portion of the jaw, these implants are subject to higher occlusal force simply because their proximity to the condyle is closer than are anterior implants. As such it would not be surprising to see some effect on implant performance that is routinely subject to a higher immediate loading. Based upon the systematic review of the literature, an analysis of the descriptive data suggested no differences in implant performance relative to anatomic location.

The level I and II articles reviewed in this systematic review appear to demonstrate no difference in clinical performance when compared to historical literature. The level I and II articles were sufficiently heterogeneous relative to the design of the studies as to prevent quantitative data accumulation/synthesis. Nonetheless there was consistent descriptive confirmation that the tilted implants demonstrated no difference relative to implant survival of the axially loaded implants (Table 7). Based on the high prosthesis survival rates (Table 8), the biomechanical stability is high. Although catastrophic complication in the definitive prosthesis, such as the fracture of metal framework, was uncommon, high prevalence of prosthetic complications was reported for both interim and definitive prostheses (Table 9). The fracture of interim acrylic prosthesis, and fracture or wear of veneering material or artificial teeth in both interim and definitive prostheses can be resolved with chairside or laboratory repairs, and occlusal adjustment in conjunction with the use of an occlusal guard. The prosthetic screw loosening or fracture can be resolved by refining the occlusal contacts and re-tightening or replacement of prosthetic screws. The need for periodic postinsertion observation and prosthetic maintenance is recommended for the edentulous patients receiving interim and definitive implant prostheses, supported by both intentionally tilted implants and axially positioned implants.

Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) (Table 10) showed the patient's satisfaction toward aesthetics, phonetics, ease of maintenance, and functional efficiency after the completion of treatment with definitive implant prostheses supported by both intentionally tilted implants and axially positioned implants. However, the variations of self-developed survey instruments made the comparisons across studies challenging. For the future studies, a reliable and validated psychometric instrument is recommended for collecting patient-center outcomes to ensure the quality of the results of studies. For instance, Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-49) (Slade & Spencer,

TABLE 9 Biological and prosthesis complications in the included Level I and Level II studies

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Biological complication</td><td>Prosthesis complication</td><td>Complication comparison</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Crespi R</td><td>1 patient, a 76-year-old nonsmoking woman, reported severe discomfort, pain, and swelling in the anterior maxilla 3 months after surgery.</td><td>2 all acrylic resin prostheses showed fracture of acrylic resin3% of sites showed occlusal screw lessening within first 6 months</td><td>The same clinical outcome was seen for patients treated with the so-called All-on-Four protocol, regardless of whether the acrylic resin restorations were reinforced with metal.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">2016</td><td rowspan="5">Tallarico M</td><td>All-on-4 group</td><td>All-on-4 group:</td><td rowspan="5">Both group experienced some technical and biological complications with no statistically significant differences between groups (p = 0.501).</td></tr><tr><td>1 patient with pain and swelling without suppuration during osseointegration, around distal implants.</td><td>2 prosthetic screws loosening in provisional restorations1 fracture of the acrylic provisional prostheses.3 fractures of the veneering material of the definitive implant supported complete FDP</td></tr><tr><td>1 patient with peri-implantitis after the definitive prosthesis delivery, within the first year of loading</td><td rowspan="3">All-on-6 group:1 fracture of the acrylic provisional prostheses.1 fracture of the veneering material of the definitive implant supported complete FDP</td></tr><tr><td>All-on-6 group1 patient with pain and swelling without suppuration during osseointegration, around distal implants.</td></tr><tr><td>2 patients with peri-implantitis after the definitive prosthesis delivery, within the first year of loading</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Francetti L</td><td>One patient reported a light hypoesthesia on the left side of the lower lip after surgery which resolved after 6 months.</td><td>The most frequent prosthetic complication was the fracture of the acrylic prosthesis that occurred in seven cases (11%). No fracture of the definitive prostheses reported.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Testori T</td><td>No biological complication was reported</td><td>Only screw loosening, which occurred in seven provisional prostheses (17.5%), affecting prosthesis stability. The screw loosening occurred on three tilted and four axially placed implants.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Tealdo T</td><td></td><td>No loose abutment screws or fractures of prosthesis frameworks reported in the study.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2010</td><td>Agliardi E</td><td>None of the patients reported any postsurgical biological complication.</td><td>Fracture of the acrylic prosthesis that occurred in 24 cases (15.6%), of which 14 in the mandible (15%) and 10 in the maxilla (16.4%).</td><td></td></tr></table>

(Continues)

TABLE 9 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Biological complication</td><td>Prosthesis complication</td><td>Complication comparison</td></tr><tr><td>2010</td><td>Hinze M</td><td>The only biological complication observed was extensive bruising in 2 patients.</td><td>Technical complication:
1. Fracture of acrylic veneer material in 4 provisional prostheses (10.8%).
2. 1 definitive reconstruction displayed fracture of the veneer material (3.7%).
3. Loss of the screw access hole restoration occurred in 9.5% of the anchors.
4. Occlusal screw loosening was observed in 6% of cases,</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Francetti L</td><td>Three axial mandibular implants in two patients showed peri-implantitis, with about 3 mm of marginal bone loss, suppuration, and bleeding on probing
Peri-implantitis was detected after 3 years of loading in one implant placed in a 50-year-old female patient, and after 18 months in two implants placed in a 60-year-old male patient. Both patients were nonsmokers.</td><td>Fracture of the acrylic prosthesis that occurred in 5 cases (15%) in the mandible and in 3 cases in the maxilla (19%)
1 fracture of the final mandibular framework has been recorded in 1 female patient after 3 years of loading (3%).</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Grandi T</td><td>No other immediate postsurgical complications.
Two patients had an episode of peri-implant microsites and were treated with nonsurgical debridement of the affected implants.</td><td>3 patients (6.3%) had a fracture of the provisional restoration, but all of the definitive prostheses remained stable throughout the study period without any complications.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Weinstein R</td><td>No complication was recorded during surgical and prosthetic procedures.</td><td>No adverse event occurred.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Malò P</td><td>Peri-implant pathology was associated with 6 implants (in 6 patients: 3 in the maxilla and 3 in the mandible) distributed within, the dehiscence subgroup 5 implants) and the fenestrations subgroup 1 implant).</td><td>6 prostheses fractured. 2 in the maxilla and 4 in the mandible) in 6 patients with bruxism.
Abutment screws loosened in 13 patients.
No other aesthetic or functional complications.</td><td></td></tr></table>

TABLE 9 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Biological complication</td><td>Prosthesis complication</td><td>Complication comparison</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">2013</td><td rowspan="2">Di P</td><td>All implant failures occurred at 8–10 weeks after placement.</td><td>Three fixed prostheses were changed to removable dentures until new implants could be placed in 2–3 months, and fixed prostheses were again immediately placed because two implants were lost on the same side in three patients.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>No biological complications occurred.</td><td>Three abutment screws loosened and five artificial teeth separated from the acrylic resin base. Fracture occurred near the implant metal coping in three provisional restorations. No fracture occurred near the cantilever area.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">2014</td><td rowspan="3">Krennmair S</td><td>Swelling, hematoma and some minor discomfort were reported in individual cases</td><td>Provisional Prosthesis:
2 Abutment screw loosening (8.3%), 5 provisional prostheses fractured (20.8%), 6 acrylic teeth fractured (20.8%), 3 acrylic teeth were repaired in office (12.5%) and 4 prostheses needed denture rebasing/reduction (16.7%).</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2 patients with 4 implants had an episode of peri-implant mucositis at the 1st year evaluation</td><td rowspan="2">Definitive Prosthesis:
No metal framework/denture fractures; however, there were 9 acrylic teeth fractures (1st year: 7 teeth fractures in 5 patients; 2nd year: 2 teeth in 1 patient) repaired in the laboratory, 6 acrylic teeth repairs in office (1st year: 2 teeth in 2 patients; 2nd year: 4 teeth in 2 patients) and 18 patients had their prostheses rebased (1st year: 13; 2nd year: 5) as a result of soft tissue shrinkage.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1 patient presented with gingival hyperplasia at 2 implants</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2014</td><td>Pera P</td><td></td><td>Minor fractures of acrylic (n = 7)
Major fractures of acrylic (n = 2)
Fracture of the metal framework (n = 1)
Loosening of the prosthetic screws (n = 6)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>Browaeys H</td><td></td><td>No complications such as fractures occurred during the surgical phase or the delivery of the immediate restoration.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>Gherlone EF</td><td></td><td>No occlusal screw loosening was observed.</td><td></td></tr></table>

(Continues)

TABLE 9 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Biological complication</td><td>Prosthesis complication</td><td>Complication comparison</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">2015</td><td rowspan="3">Ayna M</td><td rowspan="3"></td><td>All acrylic restorations showed some extent of abrasion that was, however, neither aesthetically nor functionally relevant. Veneer fractures occurred in 4 patients, all with acrylic suprastructures (28.6%).</td><td rowspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Three of those fractures (all on canine teeth) were superficial and could be repaired in situ; only one reached the metal framework, and the denture had to be repaired in the laboratory.</td></tr><tr><td>Besides a single loosening of a fixation screw, there were no prosthetic complications in patients with ceramic suprastructures.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="28">2016</td><td rowspan="28">Krennmar S</td><td>Total Incidence</td><td>Total Incidence</td><td rowspan="7">In total there were 39 biological complications (183 mucositis, 63 gingival hyperplasia, 23 fistula, 133 recessions) in the axial group I and 32 biological complications (123 mucositis, 73 gingival hyperplasia, 23 fistula, 113 recessions) in the tilted group II. (no significance)</td></tr><tr><td>Axial Implant group:</td><td>Axial Implant group:</td></tr><tr><td>Anterior implant</td><td>Abutment screw loosening: 4</td></tr><tr><td>Mucositis: 14</td><td>Acrylic tooth fracture: 8</td></tr><tr><td>Gingival Hyperplasia: 4</td><td>Acrylic tooth repaired in office: 7</td></tr><tr><td>Fistula: 2</td><td>Acrylic denture base fracture: 2</td></tr><tr><td>Recession: 7</td><td>denture rebasing/reduction: 15</td></tr><tr><td>Total: 27</td><td>denture cleaning (discoloration): 28</td><td rowspan="6">The overall incidence of prosthetic maintenance per patient/year did not differ between axial group (1.36) and tilted group (1.36).</td></tr><tr><td>Posterior implant</td><td>screw access acrylic repair: 7</td></tr><tr><td>Mucositis: 4</td><td>Opposing denture teeth fracture: 6</td></tr><tr><td>Gingival Hyperplasia: 2</td><td>Opposing denture rebasing: 2</td></tr><tr><td>Fistula: 0</td><td>Total: 79</td></tr><tr><td>Recession: 6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total: 12</td><td>Tilted Implant group:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Abutment screw loosening: 8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Tilted Implant group:</td><td>Acrylic tooth fracture: 6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Anterior implant</td><td>Acrylic tooth repaired in office: 4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Mucositis: 8</td><td>Acrylic denture base fracture: 2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Gingival Hyperplasia: 3</td><td>denture rebasing/reduction: 17</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Fistula: 0</td><td>denture cleaning (discoloration): 20</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Recession: 3</td><td>screw access acrylic repair: 8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total: 14</td><td>Opposing denture teeth fracture: 5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Posterior implant</td><td>Opposing denture rebasing: 0</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Mucositis: 4</td><td>Total: 70</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Gingival Hyperplasia: 4</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Fistula: 2</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Recession: 8</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total: 18</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

(Continues)

TABLE 9 (Continued)

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Biological complication</td><td>Prosthesis complication</td><td>Complication comparison</td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Piano S</td><td></td><td>No screw loosening, fracture or abutment fracture, or framework fractures were observed during the follow-up period. No subject lost the retention of the prosthesis during the follow-up period.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2016</td><td>Najafi H</td><td></td><td>The most common mechanical complication was acrylic tooth chipping (16 jaws, 41%).
Other complications were abutment screw loosening (one jaw, 2.5%), prosthetic screw loosening (two jaws, 5.1%) and prosthetic screw fracture (two jaws, 5.1%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2017</td><td>Li S</td><td>One implant (1.25%) showed peri-implantitis (the same implant failure due to peri-implant pathology) with a pocket of 5 mm and concurrent bone loss &gt;2 mm with bleeding on probing.</td><td>5 patients (29.4%) showed mechanical complications in provisional or definitive prostheses.
Provisional Prosthesis:
3 provisional prostheses fractured (15%, the same 3 failed prostheses). Artificial teeth separation occurred in 2 mandibular and 1 maxillary provisional prostheses (15%. One patient (5.88%) had phonetic changes 2 weeks after surgery.
Definitive Prosthesis:
Loose abutment screws were observed in 2 mandibular definitive prostheses (10%)</td><td></td></tr></table>

TABLE 10 Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) in the included Level I and Level II studies

<table><tr><td>Publication year</td><td>First author</td><td>Patient-centered outcome</td></tr><tr><td>2007</td><td>Capelli M</td><td>Patient completed a satisfaction evaluation questionnaire regarding aesthetics, phonetics, ease of maintenance, and functional efficiency. The questionnaire was repeated at each annual evaluation. All patients were satisfied with the phonetics, aesthetics, and psychological and functional aspects once treatment was completed.</td></tr><tr><td>2008</td><td>Francetti L</td><td>At each follow-up, patient&#x27;s satisfaction for aesthetics and function was evaluated by a questionnaire. Satisfaction for both aesthetics and function increased over time.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">2008</td><td rowspan="3">Testori T</td><td>28 patients (70%) completed the questionnaire for satisfaction evaluation after 1-year follow-up. (5 points Likert scale)Aesthetics (teeth and smile) was judged as excellent or very good by 75% of patients, good by 21.4% of them and sufficient by one patient (3.6%).Mastication function was considered excellent or very good by 69.2% of patients and good by 30.8%.Ease of maintenance was considered excellent or very good in 35.7% of cases, good in 42.9%, sufficient in 14.3% of cases, and poor by 7.1% of patients.</td></tr><tr><td>Phonetics was judged excellent or very good in 85.7% of cases and sufficient in 14.3%.</td></tr><tr><td>All patients affirmed that their quality of life had improved after the treatment.</td></tr><tr><td>2012</td><td>Weinstein R</td><td>The patients&#x27; satisfaction for function, aesthetics, and phonetics was assessed by means of a questionnaire. The answers were based on a 5-point Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (&quot;poor&quot;) to 5 (&quot;excellent&quot;). Eighteen patients filled in the questionnaire for satisfaction evaluation after 12 months follow-up: aesthetics (teeth aspect and color, and smile appearance) was judged as excellent or very good by 66.7% of patients, while phonetics and mastication were considered excellent or very good by 77.8 and 88.9% of patients, respectively.</td></tr><tr><td>2013</td><td>Di P</td><td>Each patient&#x27;s response to the treatment outcome in the context of function, aesthetics, and phonetics was assessed via a questionnaire administered at the 6- and 12- month recall visits. The scoring for each subject was as follows: 5 = excellent, 4 = very good, 3 = good, 2 = sufficient, and 1 = poor.All patients were satisfied with the function and aesthetic aspects of their prostheses (an excellent rating for 95.6% of patients). Phonetic change occurred in three patients within 2 weeks of implant placement.Although patients showed different levels of oral hygiene and maintenance at follow-up, all oral hygiene methods provided satisfactory periodontal maintenance. The water sprayer was preferred by most patients.</td></tr><tr><td>2014</td><td>Krennmair S</td><td>5-point Likert scale questionnairePatients provided high subjective satisfaction rates at 1st year and 2nd year examination for the following items: in general with restoration, chewing, prosthesis stability, speech, and aesthetic outcomes.Patients&#x27; subjective satisfaction score rating assessed by 5 items was high at the 1- (score: 4.6 ± 0.4) and 2-year evaluation (score: 4.7 ± 0.36).</td></tr><tr><td>2014</td><td>Pera P</td><td>Patients anecdotally reported good satisfaction with regard to the functionality and aesthetic appearance of their prostheses</td></tr><tr><td>2015</td><td>Ayna M</td><td>The subjective improvement as expressed by the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP) score was dramatic. An initially substantial impairment (approximately 30 out of a maximum of 56 points, suggesting an intermediate burden) was practically canceled after denture integration, and the score increased only slightly during observation. There were no differences between patients with acrylic and ceramic dentures.</td></tr><tr><td>2017</td><td>Li S</td><td>No details were provided. However, the following descriptions were given:The mastication function and aesthetics as well as the quality of life of GAP patients were tremendously improved by immediate implant and restoration, which was in line with the low complaint about aesthetics and function. The immediate loading procedure significantly reduced the treatment time and overall cost for Chinese patients.</td></tr></table>

1994) and its short form (OHIP-14) (Slade, 1997) are among the most commonly used survey instruments for the assessment of subjective treatment outcome in dentistry with good reliability and validity. Only one included study utilized German version of the OHIP-14 to assess the impact of the all-on-4 treatment approach on quality of life in the patient population with edentulous mandible, and the patient's quality of life significantly improved after treatment (Ayna et al., 2015).

The unpublished report, (Eckert, 2017) describes no significant difference in implant performance relative to insertion torque of the implants. The authors hypothesize that insertion torque is a design feature of an implant that is not specifically related to the relative micromotion that occurs during functional loading. In essence, when immediate loading occurs, the dental prosthesis serves to protect the implants through rigid fixation thereby reducing micromotion and allowing the biological process of osseointegration to occur.

The concept that the anterior implants are generally placed in such a way as to create axial loading, forces down the long axis of the implant with the implant being perpendicular to the occlusal plane, might be called into question. From the descriptive information that is available, it appears that the anterior implants are placed within the alveolar bone, a situation that often has the implant inclined toward the facial thereby not being subject to axial load. Perhaps there is no true axial loading of any of the implants but, without the presence of a periodontal ligament, the concept of axial loading may not be a critical factor toward the performance of dental implants.

Future research on this topic should continue to assess the long-term clinical performance of implants used to support and retain fixed prostheses in the edentulous jaws. Careful attention should be paid to the angulation of implants which is indirectly identified through the use of angled transmucosal abutments. Those abutments would only be necessary if the angle of the implant must be redirected to accommodate the prosthesis. Consistent documentation of the use of angled abutments and correlation between those implant abutments and the anatomic location of the abutments may prove valuable. In addition, the ongoing documentation of clinical performance of implants relative to insertion torque should continue however the demand for high insertion torque in all clinical settings may be called into question.

# 5 CONCLUSIONS

Based upon this systematic review of the scientific literature related to the use of intentionally tilted dental implants when compared to axially loaded implants, the following observations are made

- Level I studies that are designed to directly compare the performance of tilted implants to that of axially loaded implants were not identified.
- An analysis of the descriptive data from Level I and Level II studies suggests no differences in clinical performance of implants whether placed in an axial or in a tilted configuration.
- Lower-level studies and a large population unpublished study appear to confirm the observations regarding the clinical performance of tilted implants in comparison to axially loaded implants.

- Insufficient information is available regarding the most appropriate number of implants needed to provide immediate support and retention of a definitive prosthesis however there are numerous low-level studies that demonstrate acceptable performance when four implants are used to support and retain full-arch fixed prostheses.

# CONFLICT OF INTEREST

Dr. Lin reports personal fees from Straumann, grants from Ivoclar, grants from ITI, grants from Straumann, outside the submitted work. Dr. Eckert reports personal fees from Straumann, personal fees from Osstell, personal fees from Ivoclar, personal fees from Rodo, personal fees from Quintessence Publishing, personal fees from ClearChoice Management System, outside the submitted work.

# ORCID

Wei-Shao Lin http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4881-0569

# REFERENCES

Adell, R., Lekholm, U., Rockler, B., & Brænemark, P. I. (1981). A 15-year study of osseointegrated implants in the treatment of the edentulous jaw. International Journal of Oral Surgery, 10(6), 387-416. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0300-9785(81)80077-4
Agliardi, E., Panigatti, S., Clerico, M., Villa, C., & Malo, P. (2010). Immediate rehabilitation of the edentulous jaws with full fixed prostheses supported by four implants: Interim results of a single cohort prospective study. Clinical Oral Implants Research, 21(5), 459-465. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0501.2009.01852.x
Albrektsson, T., & Zarb, G. A. (1993). Current interpretations of the osseointegrated response: Clinical significance. International Journal of Prosthodontics, 6(2), 95-105.
Albrektsson, T., Zarb, G., Worthington, P., & Eriksson, A. R. (1986). The long-term efficacy of currently used dental implants: A review and proposed criteria of success. The International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 1(1), 11-25.
Alhashimi, N., Frithiof, L., Brudvik, P., & Bakhiet, M. (2001). Orthodontic tooth movement and de novo synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, 119(3), 307-312. https://doi.org/10.1067/mod.2001.110809
Altman, D. G. (1991). Practical statistics for medical research. London, UK: Chapman and Hall.
Ata-Ali, J., Peñarrocha-Oltra, D., Candel-Marti, E., & Peñarrocha-Diago, M. (2012). Oral rehabilitation with tilted dental implants: A metaanalysis. Medicina Oral Patologia Oral Y Cirugia Bucal, 17(4), e582.
Ayna, M., Gulses, A., & Açil, Y. (2015). Comprehensive comparison of the 5-year results of all-on-4 mandibular implant systems with acrylic and ceramic suprastructures. Journal of Oral Implantology, 41(6), 675-683. https://doi.org/10.1563/AAID-JOI-D-14-00016
Babbush, C. A., Kanawati, A., & Kotsakis, G. A. (2016). Marginal bone stability around tapered, platform-shifted implants placed with an immediately loaded four-implant-supported fixed prosthetic concept: A cohort study. The International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 31(3), 643-650. https://doi.org/10.11607/jomi.4354
Babbush, C. A., Kutsko, G. T., & Brokloff, J. (2011). The all-on-four immediate function treatment concept with NobelActive implants: A retrospective study. Journal of Oral Implantology, 37(4), 431-445. https://doi.org/10.1563/AAID-JOI-D-10-00133

Balshi, T. J., & Wolfinger, G. J. (1997). Immediate loading of Brænemark implants in edentulous mandibles: A preliminary report. Implant Dentistry, 6(2), 83-88.
Balshi, T. J., Wolfinger, G. J., Slauch, R. W., & Balshi, S. F. (2014). A retrospective analysis of 800 Branemark System implants following the All-on-Four protocol. Journal of Prosthodontics, 23(2), 83-88. https://doi.org/10.1111/jopr.12089
Brænemark, P. I. (1983). Osseointegration and its experimental background. Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry, 50(3), 399-410. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3913(83)80101-2
Branemark, R., Ohrnell, L. O., Skalak, R., Carlsson, L., & Branemark, P. I. (1998). Biomechanical characterization of osseointegration: An experimental in vivo investigation in the beagle dog. Journal of Orthopaedic Research, 16(1), 61-69.
Brænemark, R., & Skalak, R. (1998). An in-vivomethod for biomechanical characterization of bone-anchored implants. Medical Engineering & Physics, 20(3), 216-219. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1350-4533(98)00023-X
Brosh, T., Pilo, R., & Sudai, D. (1998). The influence of abutment angulation on strains and stresses along the implant/bone interface: Comparison between two experimental techniques. The Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry, 79(3), 328-334. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3913(98)70246-X
Browaeks, H., Dierens, M., Ruyffelaert, C., Matthijs, C., De Bruyn, H., & Vandeweghe, S. (2015). Ongoing crestal bone loss around implants subjected to computer-guided flapless surgery and immediate loading using the All-on-4® concept. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 17(5), 831-843.
Brunski, J. B. (1988). Biomaterials and biomechanics in dental implant design. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 3(2), 85-97.
Buser, D., Belser, U. C., & Lang, N. P. (1998). The original one-stage dental implant system and its clinical application. Periodontol, 2000(17), 106-118. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0757.1998.tb00128.x
Butura, C. C., Galindo, D. F., & Jensen, O. T. (2011). Mandibular all-on-four therapy using angled implants: A three-year clinical study of 857 implants in 219 jaws. Dental Clinics of North America, 55(4), 795-811. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cden.2011.07.015
Capelli, M., Zuffetti, F., Del Fabbro, M., & Testori, T. (2007). Immediate rehabilitation of the completely edentulous jaw with fixed prostheses supported by either upright or tilted implants: A multicenter clinical study. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 22(4), 639-644.
Cavalli, N., Barbaro, B., Spasari, D., Azzola, F., Ciatti, A., & Francetti, L. (2012). Tilted implants for full-arch rehabilitations in completely edentulous maxilla: A retrospective study. International Journal of Dentistry, 2012, 1-6. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/180379
Chrcanovic, B. R., Albrektsson, T., & Wennerberg, A. (2015). Tilted versus axially placed dental implants: A meta-analysis. Journal of Dentistry, 43(2), 149-170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdent.2014.09.002
Clelland, N. L., Lee, J. K., Bimbenet, O. C., & Brantley, W. A. (1995). A three-dimensional finite element stress analysis of angled abutments for an implant placed in the anterior maxilla. Journal of Prosthodontics, 4(2), 95-100. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-849X.1995.tb00323.x
Crespi, R., Vinci, R., Capparé, P., Romanos, G. E., & Gherlone, E. (2012). A clinical study of edentulous patients rehabilitated according to the all on four immediate function protocol. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 27(2), 428-434.
Del Fabbro, M., & Ceresoli, V. (2014). The fate of marginal bone around axial vs. tilted implants: A systematic review. European Journal of. Oral Implantol, 7(Suppl 2), S171-S189.
Di, P., Lin, Y., Li, J.-H., Luo, J., Qiu, L.-X., Chen, B., & Cui, H.-Y. (2013). The All-on-Four implant therapy protocol in the management of edentulous Chinese patients. International Journal of Prosthodontics, 26(6), 509-516. https://doi.org/10.11607/ijp.3602
Drago, C. (2016). Frequency and type of prosthetic complications associated with interim, immediately loaded full-arch prostheses: A 2-year retrospective chart review. Journal of Prosthodontics, 25(6), 433-439. https://doi.org/10.1111/jopr.12343

Eckert, S. E. (2017). Immediate loading of full arch implant retained prostheses using bone level tapered implants: Implant insertion torque, survival, and intention-to-treat Clinical cohort study. ClearChoice Dental Implant, Center of Minneapolis.
Feller, L., Khammissa, R. A., Schechter, I., Moodley, A., Thomadakis, G., & Lemmer, J. (2015). Periodontal biological events associated with orthodontic tooth movement: The biomechanics of the cytoskeleton and the extracellular matrix. The Scientific World Journal, 2015, 1-7. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/894123
Francetti, L., Agliardi, E., Testori, T., Romeo, D., Taschieri, S., & Fabbro, M. D. (2008). Immediate rehabilitation of the mandible with fixed full prosthesis supported by axial and tilted implants: Interim results of a single cohort prospective study. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 10(4), 255-263. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1708-8208.2008.00090.x
Francetti, L., Romeo, D., Corbella, S., Taschieri, S., & Del Fabbro, M. (2012). Bone level changes around axial and tilted implants in full-arch fixed immediate restorations. Interim results of a prospective study. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 14(5), 646-654. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1708-8208.2010.00304.x
Galindo, D. F., & Butura, C. C. (2012). Immediately loaded mandibular fixed implant prostheses using the all-on-four protocol: A report of 183 consecutively treated patients with 1 year of function in definitive prostheses. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 27(3), 628-633.
Gherlone, E. F., Ferrini, F., Crespi, R., Gastaldi, G., & Cappare, P. (2015). Digital impressions for fabrication of definitive "all-on-four" restorations. *Implant Dentistry*, 24(1), 125-129. https://doi.org/10.1097/ID.0000000000000206
Grandi, T., Guazzi, P., Samarani, R., & Grandi, G. (2012). Immediate loading of four (all-on-4) post-extractive implants supporting mandibular crossarch fixed prostheses: 18-month follow-up from a multicentre prospective cohort study. European Journal of Oral Implantology, 5(3), 277-285.
Hinze, M., Thalmair, T., Bolz, W., & Wachtel, H. (2010). Immediate loading of fixed provisional prostheses using four implants for the rehabilitation of the edentulous arch: A prospective clinical study. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 25(5), 1011-1018.
Kao, H.-C., Gung, Y.-W., Chung, T.-F., & Hsu, M.-L. (2008). The influence of abutment angulation on micromotion level for immediately loaded dental implants: A 3-D finite element analysis. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 23(4), 623-630.
Krekmanov, L., Kahn, M., Rangert, B., & Lindstrom, H. (2000). Tilting of posterior mandibular and maxillary implants for improved prosthesis support. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 15(3), 405-414.
Krennmair, G., Seemann, R., Weinlander, M., Krennmair, S., & Piehslinger, E. (2013). Clinical outcome and peri-implant findings of four-implant-supported distal cantilevered fixed mandibular prostheses: Five-year results. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 28(3), 831-840. https://doi.org/10.11607/jomi.3024
Krennmair, S., Seemann, R., Weinlander, M., Krennmair, G., & Piehslinger, E. (2014). Immediately loaded distally cantilevered fixed mandibular prostheses supported by four implants placed in both in fresh extraction and healed sites: 2-year results from a prospective study. European Journal of Oral Implantology, 7(2), 173-184.
Krennmair, S., Weinlander, M., Malek, M., Forstner, T., Krennmair, G., & Stimmelmayr, M. (2016). Mandibular full-arch fixed prostheses supported on 4 implants with either axial or tilted distal implants: A 3-year prospective study. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 18(6), 1119-1133. https://doi.org/10.1111/cid.12419
Li, S., Di, P., Zhang, Y., & Lin, Y. (2017). Immediate implant and rehabilitation based on All-on-4 concept in patients with generalized aggressive periodontitis: A medium-term prospective study. Clinical

Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 19(3), 559-571. https://doi.org/10.1111/cid.12483
Lv, T., Kang, N., Wang, C., Han, X., Chen, Y., & Bai, D. (2009). Biologic response of rapid tooth movement with periodontal ligament distraction. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, 136(3), 401-411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2007.09.017
Maló, P., de Araújo Nobre, M., & Lopes, A. (2013). Immediate loading of'All-on-4'maxillary prostheses using trans-sinus tilted implants without sinus bone grafting: A retrospective study reporting the 3-year outcome. European Journal of Oral Implantology, 6(3), 273-283.
Maló, P., de Araújo Nobre, M., Lopes, A., Francischone, C., & Rigolizzo, M. (2012). "All-on-4" immediate-function concept for completely edentulous maxillae: A clinical report on the medium (3 years) and long-term (5 years) outcomes. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 14(s1), e139-e150. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1708-8208.2011.00395.x
Malo, P., de Araújo Nobre, M., Lopes, A., Moss, S. M., & Molina, G. J. (2011). A longitudinal study of the survival of All-on-4 implants in the mandible with up to 10 years of follow-up. The Journal of the American Dental Association, 142(3), 310-320. https://doi.org/10.14219/jada/archive.2011.0170
Malo, P., Nobre, M. A., & Lopes, A. (2012). Immediate rehabilitation of completely edentulous arches with a four-implant prosthesis concept in difficult conditions: An open cohort study with a mean follow-up of 2 years. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 27(5), 1177-1190.
Malo, P., Rangert, B., & Nobre, M. (2003). "All-on-Four" immediate-function concept with Branemark System implants for completely edentulous mandibles: A retrospective clinical study. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 5(Suppl. 1), 2-9.
McHugh, M. L. (2012). Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochemia Medica: Biochemia Medica, 22(3), 276-282. https://doi.org/10.11613/BM.2012.031
Menini, M., Signori, A., Tealdo, T., Bevilacqua, M., Pera, F., Ravera, G., & Pera, P. (2012). Tilted implants in the immediate loading rehabilitation of the maxilla: A systematic review. Journal of Dental Research, 91(9), 821-827. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034512455802
Najafi, H., Siadat, H., Akbari, S., & Rokn, A. (2016). Effects of immediate and delayed loading on the outcomes of all-on-4 treatment: A prospective study. Journal of Dentistry, 13(6), 415-422.
Niedermaier, R., Stelzle, F., Riemann, M., Bolz, W., Schuh, P., & Wachtel, H. (2017). Implant-supported immediately loaded fixed full-arch dentures: Evaluation of implant survival rates in a case cohort of up to 7 years. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 19(1), 4-19. https://doi.org/10.1111/cid.12421
Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine (2009). Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine - Levels of Evidence. Retrieved from https:// www.cebm.net/2009/06/oxford-centre-evidence-based-medicine-levels-evidence-march-2009/
Pera, P., Menini, M., Bevilacqua, M., Pesce, P., Pera, F., Signori, A., & Tealdo, T. (2014). Factors affecting the outcome in the immediate loading rehabilitation of the maxilla: A 6-year prospective study. International Journal of Periodontics & Restorative Dentistry, 34(5), 657-665. https://doi.org/10.11607/prd.1970
Piano, S., Romeo, E., Sbricoli, L., Pisoni, G., Cea, N., & Lops, D. (2016). Simplified procedure for the immediate loading of a complete fixed prosthesis supported by four implants in the maxillary jaw: A 2-year prospective study. Clinical Oral Implants Research, 27(12), e154-e160. https://doi.org/10.1111/clr.12580
Sannino, G., & Barlattani, A. (2016). Straight versus angulated abutments on tilted implants in immediate fixed rehabilitation of the edentulous mandible: A 3-year retrospective comparative study. The International Journal of Prosthodontics, 29(3), 219-226. https://doi.org/10.11607/ijp.4448
Sannino, G., Bollero, P., Barlattani, A., & Gherlone, E. (2015). A retrospective 2-year clinical study of immediate prosthetic rehabilitation of edentulous jaws with four implants and prefabricated bars. Journal of Prosthodontics, 26(5), 387-394. https://doi.org/10.1111/jopr.12406

Schnitman, P., & Shulman, L. (1980). Dental implants: Benefit & risk. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Schnitman, P. A., Wohrle, P. S., & Rubenstein, J. E. (1990). Immediate fixed interim prostheses supported by two-stage threaded implants: Methodology and results. Journal of Oral Implantology, 16(2), 96-105.
Schnitman, P. A., Wohrle, P. S., Rubenstein, J. E., DaSilva, J. D., & Wang, N. H. (1997). Ten-year results for Branemark implants immediately loaded with fixed prostheses at implant placement. International Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Implants, 12(4), 495-503.
Slade, G. D. (1997). Derivation and validation of a short-form oral health impact profile. Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology, 25(4), 284-290. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0528.1997.tb00941.x
Slade, G. D., & Spencer, A. J. (1994). Development and evaluation of the oral health impact profile. Community Dental Health, 11(1), 3-11.
Soto-Penaloza, D., Zaragozi-Alonso, R., Peñarrocha-Diago, M., & Peñarrocha-Diago, M. (2017). The all-on-four treatment concept: Systematic review. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Dentistry, 9(3), e474. https://doi.org/10.4317/jced.53613
Tallarico, M., Canullo, L., Pisano, M., Peñarrocha-Oltra, D., Peñarrocha-Diago, M., & Meloni, S. M. (2016). An up to 7-year retrospective analysis of biologic and technical complication with the All-on-4 concept. Journal of Oral Implantology, 42(3), 265-271. https://doi.org/10.1563/aaid-joi-D-15-00098
Tallarico, M., Meloni, S. M., Canullo, L., Caneva, M., & Polizzi, G. (2016). Five year results of a randomized controlled trial comparing patients rehabilitated with immediately loaded maxillary cross arch fixed dental prosthesis supported by four or six implants placed using guided surgery. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 18(5), 965-972. https://doi.org/10.1111/cid.12380
Tealdo, T., Bevilacqua, M., Pera, F., Menini, M., Ravera, G., Drago, C., & Pera, P. (2008). Immediate function with fixed implant-supported maxillary dentures: A 12-month pilot study. Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry, 99(5), 351-360. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3913(08)60082-7
Testori, T., Del Fabbro, M., Capelli, M., Zuffetti, F., Francetti, L., & Weinstein, R. L. (2008). Immediate occlusal loading and tilted implants for the rehabilitation of the atrophic edentulous maxilla: 1-year interim results of a multicenter prospective study. Clinical Oral Implants Research, 19(3), 227-232. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0501.2007.01472.x
Tian, K., Chen, J., Han, L., Yang, J., Huang, W., & Wu, D. (2012). Angled abutments result in increased or decreased stress on surrounding bone of single-unit dental implants: A finite element analysis. Medical Engineering & Physics, 34(10), 1526-1531. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medengphy.2012.10.003
Weinstein, R., Agliardi, E., Fabbro, M. D., Romeo, D., & Francetti, L. (2012). Immediate rehabilitation of the extremely atrophic mandible with fixed full-prosthesis supported by four implants. Clinical Implant Dentistry and Related Research, 14(3), 434-441. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1708-8208.2009.00265.x

# SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article.

How to cite this article: Lin W-S, Eckert SE. Clinical performance of intentionally tilted implants versus axially positioned implants: A systematic review. Clin Oral Impl Res. 2018;29(Suppl. 16):78-105. https://doi.org/10.1111/crl.13294
