---
title: "Impact of Malocclusion Treatments on Oral Health-Related Quality of Life: An Overview of Systematic Reviews"
authors:
  - "Luciana Gon\u00e7alves Ribeiro"
  - "Leonardo Santos Antunes"
  - "Erika Calvano K\u00fcchler"
  - "Flares Baratto-Filho"
  - "Christian Kirschneck"
  - "Ludmila Silva Guimar\u00e3es"
  - "L\u00edvia Azeredo Alves Antunes"
journal: "Clinical Oral Investigations"
year: 2023
volume: "27"
issue: "3"
pages: "907-932"
doi: "10.1007/s00784-022-04837-8"
url: "https://doi.org/10.1007/s00784-022-04837-8"
source_file: "ribeiro-2023-impact-of-malocclusion-treatments-on-oral-health-related-quality-of-life-an-overview-of-systematic.md"
---
# Impact of malocclusion treatments on Oral Health-Related Quality of Life: an overview of systematic reviews

Luciana Gonçalves Ribeiro $^{1}$  · Leonardo Santos Antunes $^{1,2}$  · Erika Calvano Kuchler $^{3}$  · Flares Baratto-Filho $^{4}$  · Christian Kirschneck $^{3}$  · Ludmila Silva Guimarães $^{1}$  · Lívia Azeredo Alves Antunes $^{1,2}$

Received: 1 March 2022 / Accepted: 18 December 2022 / Published online: 5 January 2023
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2023

# Abstract

Objective To perform an overview of systematic reviews (SR) assessing the impact of malocclusion treatments (Orthodontic Treatment — OT and/or Orthodontic Surgical Treatment — OST) on Oral Health-Related Quality of Life (OHRQoL).

Materials and methods A search strategy was conducted in electronic databases until June 7th, 2021, followed by a manual search in grey literature and registration databases. Two independent authors applied the eligibility criteria, extracted the data, assessed the risk of bias (AMSTAR-2), and performed the certainty of evidence (GRADE) evaluation. Meta-analysis was planned to be carried out in RevMan 5.3 (with  $95\%$  confidence intervals (CI) considering  $p < 0.05$ ), in case of homogeneous studies considering OHRQoL instrument and time of follow-up.

Results A total of 126 articles were accessed on the database, 18 registers, 33 records on grey literature and 3 articles by means of citation searching. After duplicates removal and eligibility criteria analyses, 15 SR were included. From that, 13 showed improvement in OHRQoL after OT and/or OST. The methodological quality ranges from high  $(n = 2)$ , to critically low  $(n = 9)$ . Meta-analysis was conducted. Improvement on OHRQoL after a 6-month OST using the OQLQ-22  $(p < 0.00001$ ; 19.65; CI: 12.60–26.70) and OHIP-14 instruments  $(p < 0.00001$ ; 10.70; CI: 9.89–11.51); and after a 6-month OT using the CPQ 11–14 instrument  $(p = 0.010$ ; 3.57; CI: 0.86–6.28) with very low certainty of the evidence for all outcomes was observed.

Conclusions Although most SR selected in this overview are characterized by a critically low quality, as well as very low certainty of the evidence, OT and/or OST seem to have a positive impact in improving the OHRQoL.

Clinical Relevance The overview of existing systematic reviews compiled that OT and/or OST seem to have a positive impact on improving the OHRQoL. This information will facilitate clinical decision-making considering the clinical and psychological parameters.

Keywords Malocclusion  $\cdot$  Treatment  $\cdot$  Systematic Review  $\cdot$  Meta-analysis  $\cdot$  Quality of life

# Introduction

Malocclusions are present in the dentition, facial skeleton or both and can directly influence affected individuals [1]. They can range from a misalignment of teeth to an incorrect positioning of the arches, characterizing a set of dental alterations [1]. Objective and subjective perceptions of malocclusions perceived by patients and dentists can negatively influence the Oral-Health-Related Quality of Life (OHRQoL) [1, 2]. Thus, it is important to assess the OHRQoL of patients with malocclusions [3-5] as well as their treatment [6, 7].

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the concept of health includes physical, mental and psychosocial well-being. In order to totally cover the WHO concept of health, it is interesting to use socio-dental indicators (such as OHRQoL instruments) to complement information on the health status of patients [7]. These instruments are intended to help clinicians during treatment-related decision-making, taking into account patients' needs and providing them with information regarding possible treatment outcomes [6-9]. Thus, it is important to assess the impact of malocclusion treatments on patients' OHRQoL [5].


Malocclusions are treated with orthodontic and/or orthodontical-surgical (orthognathic surgery) approaches [10]. Orthodontic treatments (OT) are primarily aimed to correct malocclusions [11]. The indication for surgical-orthodontic treatment (SOT) is a skeletal or dentoalveolar deformity so severe that the magnitude of the problem lies outside the possible correction by orthodontics alone. These treatments may have a positive impact on OHRQoL [12-14] and provide occlusal and functional improvements and harmonize facial features via correcting both tooth position and skeletal alignment [15].

Much research on the impact of malocclusion treatments on OHRQoL has been published to date [3, 11, 12, 16-23] and has been evaluated in systematic reviews before [24-38]. These studies show various results, so there is a need to compile all the available information in the format of an overview, to facilitate the understanding of available data based on the results of several systematic reviews to aid clinical decision-making [39]. With an accumulating number of systematic reviews, an overview of existing systematic reviews is a logical next step. Overviews of systematic reviews use explicit and systematic methods to search for and identify multiple systematic reviews on related research questions in the same topic area for the purpose of extracting and analysing results across important outcomes [39]. Thus, the present study aimed to realize an overview of systematic reviews assessing the impact of malocclusion treatments (OT and/or OST) on OHRQoL according to the following question: Do OT and/or OST impact patients' OHRQoL?

# Methods

# Protocol and registration

This overview followed the Cochrane collaboration recommendation for overviews [40] and was registered beforehand in the PROSPERO database (http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/) (CRD42020180306). It was written based on the PRISMA statement (www.prismastatement.org) [41].

# Eligibility criteria

The inclusion criteria were designed according to the recommendations of the PRISMA statement, following the PICOS parameters:

P — Patients: patients with malocclusions without age restriction;

I — Intervention OT and/or OST pre-treatment;

C — Comparison: OT and/or OST post-treatment;

O — Outcome: impact on OHRQoL;

S — Study design: systematic reviews with or without meta-analysis.

Systematic reviews and overviews not related to the topic, OT or OST in patients with special needs, systematic reviews registered "in progress", narrative literature reviews, case reports, book chapters and guidelines were excluded from this overview.

# Information sources and search strategy

The electronic search strategy was carried out using the PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, Lilacs, Embase and Cochrane library databases without language restrictions including literature published until June 7, 2021 (Table 1). Keywords based on the Terms of the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) (www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/meshhome.html), MeSH synonyms, keywords selected in the Health Sciences Descriptors (DeCS) (http://decs.bvs.br/), Emtree terms (https://www-embase.ez24. periodicos.capes.gov.br/#emtreeSearch/default), related terms and free terms were used. The combination of keywords was performed through the application of the Boolean operators "OR" and "AND". To complement the search, grey literature (http://www.opengrey.eu), the Prospero systematic reviews register (http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/) and references of selected articles were screened and manually searched.

# Selection process

Initially, the titles and abstracts of the gathered articles were screened by two reviewers (LGR, LAAA) to eliminate those not meeting the inclusion criteria. In order to establish an agreement between the authors,  $10\%$  of the publications were randomly selected and their classification was compared, and then a Kappa statistic was determined  $(\mathrm{Kappa} = 0.80)$ . Studies appearing in more than one database were considered only once. In cases where abstracts and titles were unclear, the papers were read in

Table 1 Electronic database used and search strategy

<table><tr><td>Database</td><td>Search strategy</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">PubMed</td><td>#1 (malocclusion[MeSH Terms]) OR (malocclusion[Title/Abstract])</td></tr><tr><td>#2 (((systematic review[MeSH Terms]) OR (systematic review[Title/Abstract])) OR (Meta-Analysis[MeSH Terms])) OR (Meta-Analysis[Title/Abstract])) OR (overview[Title/Abstract])</td></tr><tr><td>#3 (((quality of life[MeSH Terms]) OR (quality of life[Title/Abstract])) OR (QoL[Title/Abstract])) OR (oral health-related quality of life[Title/Abstract])) OR (OHRQoL[Title/Abstract])</td></tr><tr><td>#4 ((((((((Orthodontics[MeSH Terms]) OR (Orthodontics[Title/Abstract])) OR (Orthodontics, Corrective[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthodontics, Corrective[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthodontics, Corrective[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthodontics, Corrective[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthodontic Surgery[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthognathic Surgery[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthognathic Surgery[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthognathic Surgery[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthognathic Surgery[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthognathic Surgery[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthognathic Surgery[MeSH Terms])) OR (Orthognathic Surgery[MeSH Terms])) OR (orthodontic surgical[Title/Abstract])) OR (orthodontic surgical[Title/Abstract])</td></tr><tr><td>#1 and #2 and #3 and #4</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Scopus</td><td>#1TITLE-ABS-KEY ( malocclusion)</td></tr><tr><td>#2 ( TITLE-ABS-KEY (&quot;systematic review&quot;) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( meta-analysis) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( overview))</td></tr><tr><td>#3 ( TITLE-ABS-KEY (&quot;quality of life&quot;) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( qol) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (&quot;oral health-related quality of life&quot;) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ohrqol))</td></tr><tr><td>#4 ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( orthodontics) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (&quot;orthodontics corrective&quot;) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (&quot;orthog-nathic surgery&quot;) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (&quot;orthognathic surgical procedures&quot;) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (&quot;orthodontic treat-ment&quot;) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( orthodontic-surgical))</td></tr><tr><td>#1 and #2 and #3 and #4</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="9">Web of Science</td><td>#1 TÓPICO: (malocclusion)</td></tr><tr><td>Índices=SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&amp;HCI, CPCI-S, CPCI-SSH, ESCI Tempo estipulado = Todos os anos</td></tr><tr><td>#2 TÓPICO: (systematic review) OR TÓPICO: (meta analysis) OR TÓPICO: (overview)</td></tr><tr><td>Índices=SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&amp;HCI, CPCI-S, CPCI-SSH, ESCI Tempo estipulado = Todos os anos</td></tr><tr><td>#3 TÓPICO: (quality of life) OR TÓPICO: (QoL) OR TÓPICO: (oral health-related quality of life) OR TÓPICO: (OHRQoL)</td></tr><tr><td>Índices=SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&amp;HCI, CPCI-S, CPCI-SSH, ESCI Tempo estipulado = Todos os anos</td></tr><tr><td>#4 TÓPICO: (Orthodontics) OR TÓPICO: (Orthodontics Corrective) OR TÓPICO: (Orthognathic Surgery) OR TÓPICO: (Orthognathic Surgical Procedures) OR TÓPICO: (orthodontic-surgical)</td></tr><tr><td>Índices=SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&amp;HCI, CPCI-S, CPCI-SSH, ESCI Tempo estipulado = Todos os anos</td></tr><tr><td>#1 and #2 and #3 and #4</td></tr><tr><td>Lilacs</td><td>tw::((tw:(Malocclusion or Malocclusion or Mó Oclusão) AND (Review or Revisión or Revisão or Meta-Analysis or Metanáli-sis or Metanáíse) AND (Quality of Life or Calidad de Vida or Qualidade de Vida) AND (Orthodontics or Ortodoncia or Ortodontia or Orthognathic Surgery or Cirugía Ortognática or Cirurgia Ortognática or Orthodontics, Corrective or Orto-donia Corretriva or Ortodontia Corretriva or Orthognathic Surgical Procedures or Procedimientos Quirúrgicos Ortognáti-cos or Procedimientos Cirúrgicos Ortognácticos)</td></tr><tr><td>Cochrane Library</td><td>(Malocclusion):ti,ab,kw AND (systematic review OR meta-analysis OR overview):ti,ab,kw AND (quality of life OR QoL OR Oral health-related quality of life OR OHRQoL):ti,ab,kw AND (orthodontics corrective OR orthognathic surgery OR orthognathic surgical procedures OR orthodontic treatment OR orthodontic-surgical):ti,ab,kw</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Embase</td><td>#1 &#x27;malocclusion&#x27;/exp AND [&lt;1966-2021]/py</td></tr><tr><td>#2 (&#x27;quality of life&#x27;/exp OR &#x27;oral health related quality of life&#x27;/exp OR QoL:ti,ab,kw OR OHRQoL:ti,ab,kw) AND [&lt;1966-2021]/py</td></tr><tr><td>#3 (&#x27;orthodontics&#x27;/exp OR &#x27;orthognathic surgery&#x27;/exp OR &#x27;orthognathic surgical procedures&#x27;:ti,ab,kw OR &#x27;orthodontics, corrective&#x27;:ti,ab,kw OR &#x27;orthodontic treatment&#x27;:ti,ab,kw OR &#x27;orthodontic surgical&#x27;:ti,ab,kw) AND [&lt;1966-2021]/py</td></tr><tr><td>#4 (&#x27;systematic review&#x27;/exp OR &#x27;meta analysis&#x27;/exp OR overview:ti,ab,kw) AND [&lt;1966-2021]/py</td></tr><tr><td>#1 and #2 and #3 and #4</td></tr></table> full to minimize the possibility of disregarding important studies. If disagreements regarding the eligibility of the studies for inclusion arose, a third reviewer (LSA) participated in discussions and final decision-making regarding inclusion or exclusion of reviews.


# Data collection process and data items

The data for each of the included systematic reviews were extracted by two independent evaluators (LGR, LAAA;

Kappa  $= 0.80$ ). All of the selected studies were ordered by authors/year.

Data on the type of treatment investigated, period of search, and details of the included studies were registered. Also, methodological aspects related to the quality of the selected systematic reviews and meta-analysis were registered, including journal, study design, PICO, study type, search type (electronic or manual), controlled trial register, grey literature, quality assessment or risk of bias, certainty of the evidence (GRADE), PRISMA checklist, and publication bias.

Data on main findings, such as clinical characteristics, reported in the selected systematic reviews/meta-analysis were grouped as follows: objective, sample age, OHRQoL instruments, types of treatments (OT or OST), follow-up period, main conclusions, and impact on OHRQoL (improvement or not).

During the selection and extraction of data, the authors of selected publications were contacted via email in cases of missing or unclear information and other doubts. If the authors did not provide the requested data or did not respond to the email within 40 days, the systematic review would be included only in the qualitative analysis.

# Systematic review risk of bias assessment and reporting bias assessment

The assessment of the level of evidence of the systematic reviews was carried out independently by the two reviewers (LGR and LAAA) using the instrument "Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews 2" (AMSTAR 2) [42]. Disagreements were discussed and resolved with assistance of a third reviewer (LSA).

AMSTAR-2 is a more up-to-date version of the 11 items of the original version [42]. It is a reliable tool consisting of 16 questions that can be answered with a "Yes", "No", or "partial Yes", which are used to assess the methodological quality of systematic reviews. The "Yes" answer indicates a positive result, the "No" answer means that an item could not be evaluated due to lack of information, and the "partial Yes" is used in cases, in which adherence is considered partial to standard.

The overall confidence in the results of the selected systematic reviews was classified as: (1) High: without any or with only a non-critical weakness; (2) Moderate: with more than one non-critical weakness; (3) Low: with a critical failure with or without non-critical weaknesses and (4) Critically low: with more than one critical failure, with or without non-critical weaknesses [42].

# Meta-analysis

Similar results between studies presented in the selected systematic reviews were pooled through a meta-analysis using Review Manager (RevMan Computer Program, Version 5.3) for calculations and Forest plots were created. An established alpha of 0.05 was considered in the general effect test (Z-test) [43]. For the meta-analysis, the mean difference was chosen once the data obtained was represented as continuous data (means and standard deviations). A  $95\%$  confidence interval (CI) and random effects model was considered. This overview of systematic reviews re-analysed grouping 3 outcomes considering similar instruments and time of follow-up: orthodontic-surgical treatment using OQLQ22 and OHIP-14 before and 6 months after treatment; and orthodontic treatment using the CPQ 11-14 before and 6 months after treatment.


# Certainty assessment

Two reviewers (LGR and LAAA) independently analyzed the outcomes. The quality of the evidence (certainty in the estimates of effect) was determined for the outcome using the "Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation" (GRADE) approach. GRADE defines the certainty of scientific evidence more clearly and objectively and can be classified as high, moderate, low or very low. Clinical studies start as high confidence and observational studies start as low confidence. Both can be rated down if a detected problem was related to risk of bias, indirectness of the evidence, inconsistency, imprecision and publication bias [44].

# Results

# Systematic review selection

A total of 126 articles were identified on databases: Medline via PubMed  $(n = 28)$ , Web of Science  $(n = 40)$ , Embase  $(n = 17)$ , Scopus  $(n = 39)$ , VHL (Lilacs)  $(n = 0)$ , Cochrane Library  $(n = 2)$  and database register  $(n = 18)$ . After removing duplicates, 82 remained for screening. Of these, 57 were excluded by title and abstract according to the eligibility criteria. A total of 25 systematic reviews had their full texts evaluated. After reading, 13 studies were excluded [45-57]. After the electronic search, the reference lists of the selected systematic reviews were checked manually, resulting in the inclusion of 3 additional systematic reviews. Grey Literature (Open Grey) was searched and 33 studies were identified; however, they were not systematic reviews. The final selection included 15 systematic reviews in the analysis. The selection process is illustrated in Fig. 1.

# Characteristics of systematic reviews included

The first systematic review was published in 2001 [24] and the most recent in 2021 [25]. Among the included studies, 7 focused on OST and 8 on OT. The impact of malocclusion treatment on OHRQoL and patient satisfaction was first investigated in patients receiving orthognathic surgery (OST), with the pioneering publication published in 1960, and was included in the systematic review by Hunt et al. [24], while the first publication assessing OTs was published in 2001, as mentioned in the article by Pacheco-Pereira et al. [26]. The total number of studies included in the systematic reviews, evaluated in our overview, ranged from 3 to 40 (Table 2).
Fig. 1 PRISMA 2020 flow diagram for new systematic reviews that included searches of databases, registers and other source


# Results of syntheses — results of individual studies in the systematic reviews

The systematic reviews included [24-38], comprised randomized clinical studies, non-randomized clinical studies (evaluation before and after interventions) and observational studies (cross-sectional, case-control or cohort studies). The number of databases accessed in the electronic search of the studies ranged from one [32] to nine [28].

The quality of the evidence was assessed by 14 systematic reviews [24-31, 33-38]. The evaluation of the methodological quality of the studies was carried out using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS)  $(n = 8)$  [25-29, 34, 36, 38], the Methodological Index for Nonrandomized Studies (MINORS)  $(n = 1)$  [37] items determined by the authors  $(n = 2)$  [31, 35]. the Strobe Checklist  $(n = 1)$  [30] or according to the Oxford Centre for

Evidence-based Medicine  $(n = 1)$  [33] and National Health Service (NHS) Centre for Reviews and Dissemination  $(n = 1)$  [24].

Most of the systematic reviews followed the PRISMA statement  $(n = 11)$  [34-38]. Publication bias was properly investigated by 6 systematic reviews [25, 28-30, 34, 36] and it was not applicable in 9 systematic reviews [24, 26, 27, 31-33, 35, 37, 38]. No systematic review evaluated the certainty of the evidence (Table 2).

Seven studies evaluated only OT [26, 27, 29, 31, 33, 34, 38], another 7 evaluated only OST [24, 25, 28, 32, 35-37] and only one study evaluated both OT and OST [36]. The sample size varied from 8 patients [36] to 4508 patients [29]. The follow-up periods were before and after treatment [30, 31, 36, 38], a minimum of 6 months [25, 35], 21 months [37], any time after treatment [34], first appointment to 8 years after treatment [26], pre-treatment and follow-up for at least 1 month [33], 6 months to 5 years [32] and a few days to 5 years after treatment [24]. The number of instruments used to measure the OHRQoL had a minimum variation of 1 [30] to a maximum of 30 instruments [24]. Most studies used the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-14) to evaluate OHRQoL  $(n = 13)$  [25-38]. OHRQoL improved in 13

Table 2 Data extraction: methodological aspects from the included systematic reviews

<table><tr><td>Author (Year)</td><td>Journal</td><td>Study design</td><td>PICO (P: patient; I:intervention; C:comparison; O: outcome)</td><td>Type of studies included in the paper</td><td>Quality assessment/risk of bias</td><td>Certainty of the evidence (GRADE)</td><td>Checklist PRISMA</td><td>Publication bias</td></tr><tr><td>Mandava et al. (2021)29</td><td>Medicine and Pharmacy Reports</td><td>SR</td><td>P: patients of all age groups undergoing orthodontic treatmentI: treatment orthodonticC: studies that included assessment of either of both of OHRQoL and self-esteem during pre- and post-orthodontic treatmentO: measure the OHRQoL and Self-esteem after orthodontic treatment</td><td>RCTsNon-randomized trials</td><td>RoB;NOS</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Yao et al. (2020)28</td><td>Angle Orthodontist</td><td>SR</td><td>P: patients aged older than 16 years with dentofacial deformitiesI: SFA (surgery-first approach)C: patients with conventional orthodontic-surgical treatment as a control or investigate the OHRQoL before and after the SFAO: impact on OHRQoL</td><td>RCTs;Cohort</td><td>RoB;NOS</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Macey et al. (2020)27</td><td>American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics</td><td>SR and MT*</td><td>P:children&#x27;s patientsI: treatment orthodonticC: post orthodontic treatmentO: impact on OHRQoL</td><td>RCTsProspective Cohort</td><td>NOS</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Meger et al. (2020)25</td><td>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Sugery</td><td>SR and MT</td><td>P: patients with dentofacial deformityE: patients undergoing orthognathic surgeryC: patients not undergoing orthognathic surgeryO: impact on QoL through the OHIP-14 and OQLQ questionnaires</td><td>Observational Cohort</td><td>NOS</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr></table>

Table 2 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Author (Year)</td><td>Journal</td><td>Study design</td><td>PICO (P: patient; I:intervention; C:comparison; O: outcome)</td><td>Type of studies included in the paper</td><td>Quality assessment/risk of bias</td><td>Certainty of the evidence (GRADE)</td><td>Checklist PRISMA</td><td>Publication bias</td></tr><tr><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. (2019)\(^{38}\)</td><td>Journal of Clinical and Experimental Dentistry</td><td>SR</td><td>P: adolescent patient I: treatment with fixed orthodontic appliances C: post orthodontic treatment O: impact on OHRQoL</td><td>RCTs Cohort Case-control</td><td>NOS</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Zamboni et al. (2019)\(^{37}\)</td><td>Hindawi International Journal of Dentistry</td><td>SR</td><td>P: adult patients I: orthognathic surgery; C: before and after orthog-nathic treatment; O: impact on OHRQoL after surgery</td><td>Before and after studies</td><td>MINORS</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Yi et al. (2019)\(^{36}\)</td><td>American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics</td><td>SR and MT</td><td>P: patients affected by dentofacial deformities, age 16 years or older; I: correct dentofacial deformities with orthog-nathic surgery; C: assessment of OHRQoL before and after treatment; O: assess the impact on OHRQoL at any time during and follow-up after treatment</td><td>RCTs Cohort</td><td>NOS and RoB</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Broers et al. (2017)\(^{35}\)</td><td>European Journal of Oral Sciences</td><td>SR</td><td>P: patients with dentofacial deformities I: orthognathic surgery; C: all other forms of treatment including orthodontic treatment only; O: measures of satisfac-tion, psychosocial functioning, or specific aspects thereof</td><td>Prospective Case-control Cross-sectional</td><td>Items determined by the authors</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td></tr></table>

Table 2 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Author (Year)</td><td>Journal</td><td>Study design</td><td>PICO (P: patient; I:intervention; C:comparison; O: outcome)</td><td>Type of studies included in the paper</td><td>Quality assessment/risk of bias</td><td>Certainty of the evidence (GRADE)</td><td>Checklist PRISMA</td><td>Publication bias</td></tr><tr><td>Javidi et al. (2017)\(^{34}\)</td><td>American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics</td><td>SR and MT</td><td>P: patients aged 17 years or under at the start of their orthodontic treatment; I: orthodontic treatment; C: OHRQoL before and after orthodontic treatment or a comparison group of subjects who had not undergo orthodontic treatment; O: OHRQol at any time after ortodontic treatment using CPQ</td><td>RCTs Cohort Cross-sectional Case-control</td><td>NOS for Non-randomized studies</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Piassi et al. (2016)\(^{31}\)</td><td>Indian Journal of Dental Research</td><td>SR</td><td>P:children and adolescents (up to age 18 years); I: fixed or removable appliance or intercutive orthodontic treatment; C: pretreatment to post treatment O:changes in OHRQoL</td><td>Before and after studies</td><td>Criteria adapted by Antunes et al The risk of bias by Martins et al</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Andiappan et al. (2015)\(^{30}\)</td><td>Angle Orthodontist</td><td>SR and MT</td><td>P: individuals aged 15 years and above; I: orthodontic therapy or orthognathic surgery C: before and after orthodontic treatment or orthognathic surgery; O: OHRQoL measured using the short version of the OHIP-14</td><td>Observational studies</td><td>SC</td><td>Not applied</td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td></tr></table>

Table 2 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Author (Year)</td><td>Journal</td><td>Study design</td><td>PICO (P: patient; I:intervention; C:comparison; O: outcome)</td><td>Type of studies included in the paper</td><td>Quality assessment/risk of bias</td><td>Certainty of the evidence (GRADE)</td><td>Checklist PRISMA</td><td>Publication bias</td></tr><tr><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics</td><td>SR</td><td>P: orthodontically treated patients or parents and caregivers of patients; I: orthodontic treatment; C: after the active phase of orthodontic treatment; O: satisfaction of patients or parents / caregivers after the active phase of orthodontic treatment</td><td>Cross-sectional</td><td>NOS</td><td>Not applied</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>BMC Oral Health</td><td>SR</td><td>P: patients receiving orthodontic treatment and non-orthodontic treatment; I: fixed or removable appliance, or intercpe-tive orthodontic treat-ment; C: pre-treatment to follow-up at least 1 month O: changes in OHRQoL</td><td>Case-control; Cohort studies; Cross-sectional</td><td>OCEM</td><td>Not applied</td><td>No</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>International Journal of Oral &amp; Maxillofacial Surgery</td><td>SR</td><td>P: patients with dentofa-cial deformities; I: orthognathic surgery; C: post orthognathic surgery; O: quality of life benefits after orthognathic sur-gery</td><td>RCTs Cohort Case-control Cross-sectional Retrospective study</td><td>Not determined</td><td>Not applied</td><td>No</td><td>No</td></tr></table>

Table 2 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Author (Year)</td><td>Journal</td><td>Study design</td><td>PICO (P: patient; I:intervention; C:comparison; O: outcome)</td><td>Type of studies included in the paper</td><td>Quality assessment/risk of bias</td><td>Certainty of the evidence (GRADE)</td><td>Checklist PRISMA</td><td>Publication bias</td></tr><tr><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td><td>American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics</td><td>SR</td><td>P: patients who were considering orthognathic surgery or were about to undergo orthognathic surgery, and patients who had completed orthognathic surgery; I: orthognathic surgery; C: post orthognathic surgery; O: the psychosocial benefits of surgical-orthodontic treatment</td><td>RCTsProspective studies; Retrospective studies</td><td>A hierarchical scale is recommended by the National Health Service (NHS) Centre for Reviews and Dissemination</td><td>Not applied</td><td>No</td><td>No</td></tr></table>

Footnote:
1 Study design: SR, systematic review; MT, meta-analysis
2- Type of study: RCTs, Randomized Clinical Trials
3- Cochrane risk of bias tool (RoB): NOS, Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale; MINORS, Methodological Index for Nonrandomized Studies; DoE, Directness of Evidence; RoB, Risk of Bias; SC, STROBE Checklist; OCEM, Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine; MT*Meta-analysis outside the topic of interest

Table 3 Data extraction: main finding from the selected studies

<table><tr><td>Author (Year)</td><td>Sample size and age</td><td>OHRQoL instruments</td><td>Type of treatment</td><td>Period of follow up</td><td>Improvement on OHRQoL</td></tr><tr><td>\( Mandava et al. (2021)^{29} \)</td><td>28-4508 patients 8-57 years</td><td>OIDP; OHIP-14; CPQ11-14; OHIP; PIDAQ; OHIP-G14; OHIP-16; CPQ8-10</td><td>OT</td><td>Not determined</td><td>Yes (moderate)</td></tr><tr><td>Yao et al. \( (2020)^{28} \)</td><td>214 patients 18-35 years</td><td>OQLQ; OHIP-14</td><td>OST</td><td>2-3 weeks / 12 month after orthognathic surgery</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Macey et al. \( (2020)^{27} \)</td><td>104-1784 patients 1-17 years</td><td>OIDP; SC; ECOHIS; FIS; OHIP-14; CPQ 11-14; CPQ 8-10; CS-OIDP; SOHO-5; SOC-13; RS-ES; B-ECOHIS; SD(Qs)</td><td>OT</td><td>Not determined</td><td>Inconclusive</td></tr><tr><td>Meger et al. \( (2020)^{25} \)</td><td>14-74 patients Older than 18 years</td><td>OHIP-14; OQLQ-22</td><td>OST</td><td>Follow-up of at least 6 months</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. \( (2019)^{38} \)</td><td>27-324 patients 11-25 years</td><td>OHIP-14; CPQ 11-14</td><td>OT</td><td>Before starting treatment and end of treatment;</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Zamboni et al. \( (2019)^{37} \)</td><td>9-158 patients Unreported age</td><td>VAS; PSQ; GTS; OIDP; SAT; DIDLI; RS-ES; AAQ; OHIPJ-54;FACE - Q; OHIP-14; OQLQ; WHOQOL-Bref; SF - 32; SF-36; SOC-29</td><td>OST</td><td>1 to 21 months</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Yi et al. \( (2019)^{36} \)</td><td>8-110 patients 16 years or older</td><td>OHIP-14; OHIP-49; OHIPJ-54; OQLQ-22</td><td>OST</td><td>Before treatment, before surgery, 1-2 months after surgery and 6 months after surgery</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Broers et al. \( (2017)^{35} \)</td><td>15-188 patients 17 years or older</td><td>WHOQoL-Bref; EPI-POMS; EPI; TSCS; BSS; SAD; FNE; GHQ; PSPSQ; OHIP14; SCL-90-R; SIP; OHSQ; PARindex,</td><td>OST</td><td>Minimum 6 months after surgery</td><td>Inconclusive</td></tr><tr><td>Javidi et al. \( (2017)^{34} \)</td><td>27-1675 patients Up to 17 years</td><td>CPQ 11-14; OHIP-14; OIDP</td><td>OT</td><td>Any time after orthodontic treatment</td><td>Yes (moderate)</td></tr><tr><td>Piassi et al. \( (2016)^{31} \)</td><td>45-284 patients 11-15 years</td><td>CPQ11-14; PPQ+FIS; OHIP-14</td><td>OT</td><td>Before starting treatment and end of treatment</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Andiappan et al. \( (2015)^{30} \)</td><td>14-1675 patients Above 15 years of age</td><td>OHIP-14</td><td>OT or OST</td><td>Before starting treatment and end of treatment</td><td>Yes</td></tr></table>

Table 3 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Author (Year)</td><td>Sample size and age</td><td>OHRQoL instruments</td><td>Type of treatment</td><td>Period of follow up</td><td>Improvement on OHRQoL</td></tr><tr><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>9–299 patients5–30 years</td><td>DIDL; PSPS; QMIS; P-SPSQMIS; V177-IMVMPQ;VABOS; RIGS-ESS-EV; QQP-orthodontics modifi-ced from quality from patients&#x27; perspective (QPP)</td><td>OT</td><td>Posttreatment:At first visit of retention – 8 years</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>118–1675 patients7–6 years</td><td>CS-OIDP; OIDP; OHIP-14; CPQ 11–14; OHQoL-UK</td><td>OT</td><td>Pre-treatment to follow-up at least 1 month</td><td>Yes(moderate)</td></tr><tr><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>18–501 patientsUnreported age</td><td>SF-36; OHIP-14; OQLQ; KIAI/PI; SC90R; GTS;MMPI; SIPPD; OHSQ; MBI; EPI; BCS; FTD-MHSCS; MSOT; QDAorIM</td><td>OST</td><td>6 months—5 years</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td><td>13–282 patientsUnreported age</td><td>BCS; BSS; EPI; FPQ; GAS; GHQ; HOS; IMI;MBHI; PMS; RI/ES; RSS; SA; SAD/FNES; SCL-90-R; TSCS; WAS; HADS; YGPI; STAI; BDI;SFSSQ; DSP; II;S-EI; ZAI; ZDI; MMPI; FES; QDAorIM</td><td>OST</td><td>Few days—5 years after surgery</td><td>Yes</td></tr></table>

Footnote: Orthodontic Treatment (OT) and/or Orthodontic Surgical Treatment (OST); OHRQoL (oral health related quality of life) instruments: PIDAQ, Psychosocial Impact of Dental Aesthetic Questionnaire; SC, Self Concept; SD(Qs), Specially Designed (Qs); ECOHIS, Early Childhood Oral Health Impact Scale; SOHO-5, Scale of Oral Health Outcomes for Five-Year-Old Children; DIDLI, Dental Impact on Daily Living Index; RS-ES, Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale; AAQ, Acceptance and Action Questionnaire; OHIP, Oral Health Impact Profile; OHQoL-UK, UK oral health related quality of life measure; PPQ, Parents Perception Questionnaire; OQLQ, Orthognathic Quality of Life Questionnaire; OIDP, Oral Impacts on Daily Performances; OHIPJ-54 OHIP, Japanese version of OHIP; CS-OIDP, condition-specific OIDP; FIS, Family Impact scale; SF-36 or 32, Short Form Health Survey; WHOQOL-Bref, World Health Organization Quality of Life-Bref; CPQ, Child Perception Questionnaire; SOC-13 or 29, Sense of Coherence 13 or 29-item scale; PARindex, Peer Assessment Rating Index; PSPSQ, Post-Surgical Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire; EPI-POMS, Eysenck Personality Inventory Profile of Mood States; EPI, Eysenck Personality Inventory; TSCS, Tennessee Self-Concept Scale; SCL-90-R, Revised Symptom Checklist-90; OHSQ, Oral Health Status Questionnaire; FNE, Fear of Negative Evaluation; GHQ, General Health Questionnaire; BSS, Body Satisfaction Scale; SAD, Social Avoidance and Distress; SIP, Sickness Impact Profile; KIA/PI, Kiyak's Internal Assessment/Personal Inventory; SC90R, Symptom Checklist 90 Revised; GTS, Global Transition Scale; MMPI, Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory; SIPPD, Sickness Impact Profile Psychosocial Dimension; MBI, Maslach Burnout Inventory; BCS, Body Cathexis Scale; FTDMHSCS, Fitts Tennessee Department of Mental Health Self-Concept Scale; MSOT, Motives for Surgical-Orthodontic Treatment; QDAorIM, Questionnaire devised by author or invalidated measure; FPQ, Factor-Personality Questionnaire; GAS, Goal Attainment Scale; HOS, Health Opinion Survey; IMI, Impact Message Inventory; MBHI, Millon Behavioral Health Inventory; RI/ES, Rotter's Internality/Externality Scale; RSS, Rosenberg Self-esteem Scal; SA, Surgical Audit; SAD/FNES, Social Avoidance and Distress/Fear of Negative Evaluation Scales; WAS, Ward Adjustment Scale; HADS, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale; YGPI, Yatabe-Guilford Personality Inventory; STAI, State-Trait Anxiety Inventory; BDI, Beck Depression Inventory; SFSSQ, Short Form Social Support Questionnaire; FES, Family Environment Scale; DSP, Derogatis Stress Profile; II, Introspectiveness Inventory; S-EI, Self-Esteem Inventory; ZAI, Zung Anxiety Inventory; ZDI, Zung Depression Inventory; VAS, visual analogue scale; PSQ, Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire; SAT, Satisfaction with life scale; DIDL, Dental impact on daily living; PSPSS, Post-Surgical Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire Maede and Inglehart's scale; P-SPSQMIS, Post-Surgical Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire Maede and Inglehart's Scale; V177-IMVMPQ, Validated 177-Item Modified Version of Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire

Table 4 Amstar-2

<table><tr><td>Questions</td><td>Mandava et al. (2021)29</td><td>Yao et al. (2020)28</td><td>Macey et al. (2020)27</td><td>Meger et al. (2020)25</td><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. (2019)38</td><td>Zamboni et al. (2019)37</td><td>Yi et al. (2019)36</td><td>Broers et al. (2017)35</td><td>Javidi et al. (2017)34</td><td>Piassi et al. (2016)31</td><td>Adiappan et al. (2015)30</td><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td></tr><tr><td>Question 1: Did the research questions and inclusion criteria for the review include the components of PICO?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Question 2: Did the report of the review contain an explicit statement that the review methods were established prior to the conduct of the review and did the report justify any signifi-cante-diviations from the protocol?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Parcial yesa</td><td>Parcial yesa</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nob</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nob</td><td>Nob</td><td>Nob</td><td>Nob</td><td>Nob</td><td>Nob</td></tr></table>

Table 4 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Questions</td><td>Mandava et al. (2021)29</td><td>Yao et al. (2020)28</td><td>Macey et al. (2020)27</td><td>Meger et al. (2020)25</td><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. (2019)38</td><td>Zamboni et al. (2019)37</td><td>Yi et al. (2019)36</td><td>Broers et al. (2017)35</td><td>Javidi et al. (2017)34</td><td>Piassi et al. (2016)31</td><td>Adiappan et al. (2015)30</td><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td></tr><tr><td>Question 3: Did the review authors explain their selec- tion of the study designs for inclu-sion in the review?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Noc</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Noc</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Question 4: Did the review authors use a comprehensive literature search strategy?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Parcial Yese</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nod</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nod</td><td>Yes</td><td>Parcial Yese</td><td>Nod</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nof</td><td>Pacial Yese</td></tr><tr><td>Question 5: Did the review authors perform study selection in dupli-cate?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nog</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nog</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nog</td></tr></table>

Table 4 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Questions</td><td>Mandava et al. (2021)29</td><td>Yao et al. (2020)28</td><td>Macey et al. (2020)27</td><td>Meger et al. (2020)25</td><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. (2019)38</td><td>Zamboni et al. (2019)37</td><td>Yi et al. (2019)36</td><td>Broers et al. (2017)35</td><td>Javidi et al. (2017)34</td><td>Piassi et al. (2016)31</td><td>Adiappan et al. (2015)30</td><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td></tr><tr><td>Question 6: Did the review authors perform data extraction in duplicate?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nog</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nog</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nog</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nog</td><td>Nog</td></tr><tr><td>Question 7: Did the review authors provide a list of excluded studies and justify the exclusions?</td><td>Noh</td><td>Yes</td><td>Noh</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Noh</td><td>Noh</td><td>Noh</td></tr><tr><td>Question 8: Did the review authors describe the included studies in adequate detail?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr></table>

Table 4 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Questions</td><td>Mandava et al. (2021)29</td><td>Yao et al. (2020)28</td><td>Macey et al. (2020)27</td><td>Meger et al. (2020)25</td><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. (2019)38</td><td>Zamboni et al. (2019)37</td><td>Yi et al. (2019)36</td><td>Broers et al. (2017)35</td><td>Javidi et al. (2017)34</td><td>Piassi et al. (2016)31</td><td>Adiappan et al. (2015)30</td><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td></tr><tr><td>Question 9: Did the review authors use a satisfactory technique for assessing the risk of bias (RoB) in individual studies that were included in the review?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Noi</td><td>Noi</td><td>Noi</td></tr><tr><td>Question 10: Did the review authors report on the sources of funding for the studies included in the review?</td><td>Yesj</td><td>Yesj</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yesj</td><td>Yesj</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yesj</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yesj</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr></table>

Table 4 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Questions</td><td>Mandava et al. (2021)29</td><td>Yao et al. (2020)28</td><td>Macey et al. (2020)27</td><td>Meger et al. (2020)25</td><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. (2019)38</td><td>Zamboni et al. (2019)37</td><td>Yi et al. (2019)36</td><td>Broers et al. (2017)35</td><td>Javidi et al. (2017)34</td><td>Piassi et al. (2016)31</td><td>Adiappan et al. (2015)30</td><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td></tr><tr><td>Question 11: If meta-analysis was performed, did the review authors use appropriate methods for statistical combination of results?</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td></tr><tr><td>Question 12: If meta-analysis was performed, did the review authors assess the potential impact of RoB in individual studies on the results of the meta-analysis or other evidence synthesis?</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td></tr></table>

Table 4 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Questions</td><td>Mandava et al. (2021)29</td><td>Yao et al. (2020)28</td><td>Macey et al. (2020)27</td><td>Meger et al. (2020)25</td><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. (2019)38</td><td>Zamboni et al. (2019)37</td><td>Yi et al. (2019)36</td><td>Broers et al. (2017)35</td><td>Javidi et al. (2017)34</td><td>Piassi et al. (2016)31</td><td>Adiappan et al. (2015)30</td><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td></tr><tr><td>Question 13: Did the review authors account for RoB in primary studies when interpreting/discussing the results of the review?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>No1</td><td>No1</td><td>No1</td></tr><tr><td>Question 14: Did the review authors provide a satisfac-tory expla-nation for, and discussion of, any heterogeneity observed in the results of the review?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nom</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nom</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nom</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nom</td><td>Yes</td><td>Nom</td><td>Nom</td></tr></table>

Table 4 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Questions</td><td>Mandava et al. (2021)29</td><td>Yao et al. (2020)28</td><td>Macey et al. (2020)27</td><td>Meger et al. (2020)25</td><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. (2019)38</td><td>Zamboni et al. (2019)37</td><td>Yi et al. (2019)36</td><td>Broers et al. (2017)35</td><td>Javidi et al. (2017)34</td><td>Piassi et al. (2016)31</td><td>Adiappan et al. (2015)30</td><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td></tr><tr><td>Question 15: If they performed quantitative synthesis did the review authors carry out an adequate investigation of publication bias (small study bias) and discuss its likely impact on the results of the review?</td><td>Nok</td><td>Nok</td><td>Nok</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>Yes</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td><td>NoK</td></tr></table>

Table 4 (continued)

<table><tr><td>Questions</td><td>Mandava et al. (2021)29</td><td>Yao et al. (2020)28</td><td>Macey et al. (2020)27</td><td>Meger et al. (2020)25</td><td>Ferrando-Magraner et al. (2019)38</td><td>Zamboni et al. (2019)37</td><td>Yi et al. (2019)36</td><td>Broers et al. (2017)35</td><td>Javidi et al. (2017)34</td><td>Piassi et al. (2016)31</td><td>Adiappan et al. (2015)30</td><td>Pachêco-Pereira et al. (2015)26</td><td>Zhou et al. (2014)33</td><td>Soh et al. (2013)32</td><td>Hunt et al. (2001)24</td></tr><tr><td>Question 16: Did the review authors report any potential sources of conflict of interest, including any funding they received for conducting the review?</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Quality</td><td>Critically low</td><td>Critically low</td><td>Critically low</td><td>Moderate</td><td>Low</td><td>Critically low</td><td>High</td><td>Critically low</td><td>High</td><td>Low</td><td>Critically low</td><td>Low</td><td>Critically low</td><td>Critically low</td><td>Critically low</td></tr></table> a- Does not report the strategy to investigate cases of heterogeneity

b- Does not report n previous protocol registration c- Did not report the type of study (design) to be considered as na elegibility criterion d- There is language restriction e- Not collected in selected article searches, clinical records and/or grey literature
f-Search Only one database g- Step was not perfomed by h- Did not justify each exclusion of the a i- Did not use satisfactory technique to assess risk of bias
j- Information not reported k- Not applicable, meta-analysis was not conducted
1- Unprocessed interpretation or discussion of risk of bias m- No discussion on heterogeneity of studies n- Did not discuss publication bias studies [24, 25, 28-38], while two studies were inconclusive [27, 35] (Table 3).
Fig. 2 OQLQ-22 Orthodontic-surgical treatment — before and 6 months after treatment
Fig. 3 OHIP-14—Orthodontic-surgical treatment — before and 6 months after treatment
Fig. 4 CPQ 11-14 - Orthodontic treatment — before and 6 months after treatment


# Risk of bias in studies — reporting biases of the systematic reviews

Only two studies [34, 36] were classified as 'high quality' studies, because they met all the criteria of the AMSTAR 2 instrument. One study [25] was classified as "moderate quality" with more than one non-critical weakness. Three studies [26, 31, 38] were classified as "low quality" with a critical failure with or without non-critical weaknesses. Nine studies [24, 27-30, 32, 33, 35, 37] were classified as "critically low" due to the presence of more than one critical failure with or without non-critical weaknesses. The classification of the majority of studies into the critically low-quality group was attributed to the violation of criteria such as previous registration of the protocol (item 2), adequacy of the bibliographic research (item 4), justification for the exclusion of individual studies (item 7), risk of bias of individual studies included in the review (item 9) and consideration of the risk of bias, when interpreting the results of the review (item 13) (Table 4).


# Results of syntheses — meta-analysis-quantitative syntheses

This overview of systematic reviews re-analyzed outcome data from 4 published systematic reviews selected [25, 30, 34, 36]. The studies were combined within the meta-analysis considering the studies with similar instruments and similar time of follow-up. Seven studies [13, 20, 58-62] reported in systematic reviews of Meger et al. [25] and Yi et al. [36], used the instruments of the Orthognatic Quality of Life Questionnaire - 22 (OQLQ - 22) and Oral Health Impact Profile - 14 (OHIP - 14) to measure OHRQoL in the pre-treatment and 6-month post-orthognathic surgical treatment periods. The total scale presented the following data, when measuring OHRQoL using the OQLQ-22 instrument  $(\mathrm{I}^2 96\% ;p < 0.00001;19.65;\mathrm{CI}:12.60 - 26.70)$  and the OHIP-14 instrument  $(\mathrm{I}^2 0\% ;p < 0.00001;10.70;\mathrm{CI}:$

Table 5 Certainty of the evidence according to the outcomes

<table><tr><td colspan="7">Certainty assessment</td><td colspan="2">№ of patients</td><td rowspan="2">Certainty</td><td rowspan="2">Outcome</td></tr><tr><td>№ of studies</td><td>Study design</td><td>Risk of bias</td><td>Inconsistency</td><td>Indirectness</td><td>Imprecision</td><td>Other considera-tions</td><td>pre-treatment</td><td>post-treatment</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>observational stud-ies</td><td>serious a</td><td>very serious b</td><td>not serious</td><td>very serious c</td><td>publication bias strongly suspected d</td><td>189</td><td>189</td><td>⊕○○○ very low</td><td>After 6 months of Orthodontic-surgical treatment, positive impact on patients&#x27; OHRQoL detected by OQLQ-22 was observed, however the certainty of the evidence was very low</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>observational stud-ies</td><td>serious a</td><td>not serious</td><td>not serious</td><td>very serious c</td><td>publication bias strongly suspected d</td><td>164</td><td>164</td><td>⊕○○○ very low</td><td>After 6 months of Orthodontic-surgical treatment, positive impact on patients&#x27; OHRQoL detected by OHIP-14 was observed, however the certainty of the evidence was very low</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>observational stud-ies</td><td>very serious a</td><td>not serious</td><td>not serious</td><td>not serious</td><td>none</td><td>652</td><td>473</td><td>⊕○○○ very low</td><td>After 6 months of Orthodontic treatment, positive impact on patients&#x27; OHRQoL detected by CPQ11-14 was observed, however the certainty of the evidence was very low</td></tr></table>

${CI}$  ,Confidence interval;  ${MD}$  ,Mean difference
Explanations
a. Studies with risk of bias b. Studies show a large difference in effect, without overlapping CI c. Sample smaller than 400 patients d. Small sample

9.89-11.51), with a positive impact on OHRQoL detected by both outcomes (Figs. 2 and 3).

Four studies [11, 19, 63, 64] presented in the systematic review of Javidi et al. [34], evaluated the use of the Child Perception Questionnaire 11-14 (CPQ 11-14) instrument to measure OHRQoL in pre-treatment and 6 months after orthodontic treatment. The total scale reported improvements in OHRQoL  $(\mathrm{I}^2 71\% ;p = 0.010;3.57$  CI:0.86-6.28 Fig.4).

# Certainty of the evidence

The certainty of the evidence was based on the three outcomes used in the meta-analysis [25, 30, 34, 36]: OQLQ-22 Orthodontic-surgical treatment — before and 6 months after treatment; OHIP-14 — Orthodontic-surgical treatment — before and 6 months after treatment; CPQ 11-14 — Orthodontic-treatment — before and 6 months after treatment. All outcomes considered in the analysis showed very low certainty of evidence. The main reasons are the small sample size, high to moderate risk of bias, and wide confidence intervals (Table 5).

# Discussion

Cochrane Overviews of Reviews (Overviews) use explicit and systematic methods to search and identify multiple systematic reviews on related research questions in the same topic area for the purpose of extracting and analyzing their results across important outcomes [23]. The narrative results of this overview of systematic reviews suggest that OT and/or OST have an impact on OHRQoL of patients with malocclusion. The majority [24, 25, 28-34, 36-38] of systematic reviews reported a positive impact on OHRQoL after OT, OST or both interventions. However, in some studies [29, 33, 34], the OT evaluated in some systematic reviews influenced the OHRQoL in a moderately positive way. Only two systematic reviews [27, 35] presented inconclusive results. The authors justified these results reporting that there was insufficient quality of the studies included in their systematic review and that there is no evidence to support such foundations on the effect of the treatment of malocclusions on OHRQoL. Among the systematic reviews selected, only four performed meta-analysis [25, 30, 34, 36], and all of them reported an association between OT/OST and OHRQoL.

Overviews can present outcome data exactly as they appear in the included systematic reviews, or they can re-analyze the systematic review outcome data in a way that differs from the analyses conducted in the systematic reviews [23]. This overview of systematic reviews re-analysed outcome data from 4 published systematic reviews selected [25, 30, 34, 36] grouping 3 outcomes: Orthodontic-surgical treatment using OQLQ-22 and OHIP-14 before and 6 months after treatment; and orthodontic-treatment using CPQ 11-14 before and 6 months after treatment. It was observed that a positive impact on OHRQoL was detected for all outcomes. However, the certainty of the evidence evaluated by this overview of systematic reviews was considered very low for all outcomes. The absence of studies with high methodological quality and the fact that the studies included in the systematic reviews were observational led to a risk of bias and a confounding factor in the studies. The studies heterogeneity was influenced by the groups with varied age of the patients evaluated and small samples sizes.


The best methodological design for assessing OHRQoL in both OT and OST can be found in clinical studies. This fact indicates the importance of this type of study for the optimization of different therapeutic approaches within the orthodontic domain and its effectiveness for the analysis of OHRQoL. The most commonly used instrument assessing OHRQoL in the included studies was the OHIP-14. This instrument was developed to assess the impact of OHRQoL on individuals from 14 years of age, detecting their perception of dysfunctions, discomforts and disabilities due to problems related to oral and dental health. Via the OHIP-14 instrument, most studies have observed that the treatment of malocclusions is associated with a positive impact on OHRQoL. This highlights the applicability of this instrument and its high acceptance among orthodontists.

The AMSTAR 2 instrument is considered an adequate tool to critically assess the methodological quality of the systematic reviews included in this overview of systematic reviews [42]. Despite the existence of systematic reviews with high methodological quality regarding the application of all AMSTAR 2 criteria, most systematic reviews included in this overview presented moderate or critically low methodological quality due to failures to meet certain criteria, i.e. the lack of previous registration of the protocol, language restrictions, searches in references of selected articles, in clinical records and/or grey literature, searches in more than one database, justification for excluding individual studies, satisfactory technique for assessing the risk of bias, and conducting a meta-analysis. Failures to meet these criteria compromise the reliability of systematic reviews selected, generating a publication bias.

Based on the above, the biggest limitation of the present overview of systematic reviews is the inclusion of systematic reviews with critically low methodological quality (the majority of them) and consequently of studies with a publication bias. Therefore, future research with high methodological quality using competent tools (such as GRADE) must be carried out to analyze the impact of OT and/or OST on OHRQoL, including more specific measures such as classification of malocclusions, time of follow-up and duration of treatment.

In general, regardless of the type of malocclusion treatment (OT or OST), the systematic reviews selected in this overview presented some methodological limitations, such as: the absence of studies with high quality of evidence; the fact that most studies were observational and, consequently, the risk of bias and confusion was greater; lack evaluation of publication bias and mainly, no systematic review selected evaluated the certainty of the evidence. A tool used in the assessment of the quality of scientific evidence in systematic reviews is the GRADE (http://cccg.cochrane.org/recursosdo autor). GRADE is considered an important guide for assessing the certainty of evidence and strength of studies [65].


These limitations may have influenced the conclusions about a moderate impact on OHRQoL. Other points that should be highlighted in the selected systematic reviews are the lack of time limitation for assessing the impact on OHRQoL after OT or OST in the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the systematic review and the presence of included studies with variation in the follow-up periods (short and long); furthermore, the clinical heterogeneity of the studies that made it impossible to group the data, the diversity of the follow-up factor and the fact that the types of malocclusions treated were among the most heterogeneous criteria in this general analysis of the included studies. Heterogeneity of the majority of the studies justifies that only 4 systematic reviews selected presented data to realize a meta-analysis.

The OHRQoL should be considered by orthodontists as an important factor during the entire treatment process. Regardless of different types of treatments for malocclusions proposed in systematic reviews, it is believed that they positively impact the OHRQoL of patients, providing benefits on a psychological, psychosocial and esthetic level regarding the dentoalveolar deformity.

Overviews of systematic reviews are an important method compiling findings of previous systematic reviews in a single study for the benefit of the scientific community. This overview found that malocclusion treatments (OT or OST) result in a positive impact on patients' OHRQoL; however, the low certainty of evidence limits definite clinical conclusions. The first systematic review on the topic was published in the year 2001 [24] with continuing reviews until 2021 [29]. This highlights the importance and the necessity of such studies. Based on the findings of this overview, future systematic reviews and meta-analysis with high methodological quality are still necessary to investigate the effects of OT and/or OST on OHRQoL. These studies should include more specific criteria evaluating the level of recommendation based on certainty of the evidence to support clinical decision-making based on evidence and not on empirical findings.

# Conclusion

Although OT and/or OST seem to have a positive impact on patients' OHRQoL, the majority of systematic reviews included in this overview was of critically low methodological quality and characterized by a very low certainty of evidence. Therefore, more high-quality studies are required to confirm the influence of malocclusion treatment on improvement of patients' OHRQoL.


Author contribution All authors contributed to the study conception and design. Data collection and analysis were performed by Luciana Gonçalves Ribeiro, Lívia Azeredo Alves Antunes, Ludmila Silva Guimarães, Flares Baratto-Filho, Erika Calvano Kuchler and Leonardo Santos Antunes. The first draft of the manuscript was written by Luciana Gonçalves Ribeiro and Lívia Azeredo Alves Antunes. The final draft was written and revised by Lívia Azeredo Alves Antunes (systematic review methods), and Christian Kirschneck (orthodontics), and all authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding This systematic review and meta-analysis study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior—Brasil (CAPES)—Finance Code 001(Ribeiro), CNPq- Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (Antunes/ Antunes) and by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (Küchler/ Kirschneck accepted on July 4, 2019).

# Declarations

Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.

Submission declaration The work is part of academic thesis and has not been published previously.

# References

1. Obilade OA, Sanu OO, da Costa OO (2016) Impact of three malocclusion traits on the quality of life of orthodontic patients. Int Orthod 14(3):366-385. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ortho.2016.07.003
2. Jago JD (1974) The epidemiology of dental occlusion; a critical appraisal. J Public Health Dent 34(2):80-93. https://doi.org/10.111/j.1752-7325.1974.tb00682.x
3. Feu D, de Oliveira BH, de Oliveira Almeida MA, Kiyak HA, Miguel JAM (2010) Oral health-related quality of life and orthodontic treatment seeking. Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 138(2):152-159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2008.09.033
4. Chen M, Feng Z-C, Liu X, Li Z-M, Cai B, Wang D-W (2015) Impact of malocclusion on oral health-related quality of life in young adults. Angle Orthod 85(6):986-991. https://doi.org/10.2319/101714-743.1
5. Sischo L, Broder HL (2011) Oral health-related quality of life: what, why, how, and future implications. J Dent Res 90(11):1264-1270. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034511399918
6. AlQuraini N, Shah R, Cunningham SJ (2019) Perceptions of outcomes of orthodontic treatment in adolescent patients: a qualitative study. Eur J Orthod 41(3):294-300. https://doi.org/10.1093/ejo/cjy071
7. Antunes LAA, Ornellas G, Fraga RS, Antunes LS (2018) Oral health outcomes: the association of clinical and socio-dental indicators to evaluate dental caries in preschool children. Cien Saude Colet 23(2):491-500. https://doi.org/10.1590/1413-81232018232.21022015
8. Zheng D-H, Wang X-X, Su Y-R, Zhao Y-R, Xu C, Kong C, Zhang J (2015) Assessing changes in quality of life using the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP) in patients with different classifications of

malocclusion during comprehensive orthodontic treatment. BMC Oral Health 15:148. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-015-0130-7
9. Foster Page LA, Thomson WM, Jokovic A, Locker D (2005) Validation of the Child Perceptions Questionnaire (CPQ11-14). J Dent Res 84(7):649-652. https://doi.org/10.1177/154405910508400713
10. Mayo KH, Vig KD, Vig PS, Kowalski CJ (1991) Attitude variables of dentofacial deformity patients: demographic characteristics and associations. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 49(6):594-602. https://doi.org/10.1016/0278-2391(91)90341-i
11. Healey DL, Gauld RDC, Thomson WM (2016) Treatment-associated changes in malocclusion and oral health-related quality of life: a 4-year cohort study. Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 150(5):811-817. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2016.04.019
12. Lee S, McGrath C, Samman N (2008) Impact of orthognathic surgery on quality of life. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 66(6):1194-1199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joms.2008.01.006
13. Choi WS, Lee S, McGrath C (2010) Samman N (2010) Change in quality of life after combined orthodontic-surgical treatment of dentofacial deformities. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 109(1):46-51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tripleo.2009.08.019
14. Pelo S, Gasparini G, Garagiola U, Cordaro M, Di Nardo F, Staderini E, Patini R, de Angelis P, D'Amato G, Saponaro G, Moro A (2017) Surgery-first orthognathic approach vs traditional orthognathic approach: oral health-related quality of life assessed with 2 questionnaires. Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 152(2):250-254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2016.12.022
15. Cheng LH, Roles D (1998) Telfer MR (1998) Orthognathic surgery: the patients' perspective. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 36(4):261-263. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0266-4356(98)90709-4
16. Feu D, Miguel JAM, Celeste RK, Oliveira BH (2013) Effect of orthodontic treatment on oral health-related quality of life. Angle Orthod 83(5):892-898. https://doi.org/10.2319/100412-781.1
17. Silvola A-S, Rusanen J, Tolvanen M, Pirttiniemi P, Lahti S (2012) Occlusal characteristics and quality of life before and after treatment of severe malocclusion. Eur J Orthod 34(6):704-709. https://doi.org/10.1093/ejo/cjr085
18. Maia NG, Normando D, Maia FA, Ferreira MAF, do Socorro Costa Feitosa Alves M (2010) Factors associated with long-term patient satisfaction. Angle Orthod 80(6):1155-1158. https://doi.org/10.2319/120909-708.1
19. Agou S, Locker D, Muirhead V, Tompson B, Streiner DL (2011) Does psychological well-being influence oral-health-related quality of life reports in children receiving orthodontic treatment? Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 139(3):369-377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2009.05.034
20. Murphy C, Kearns G, Sleeman D, Cronin M, Allen PF (2011) The clinical relevance of orthognathic surgery on quality of life. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 40(9):926-930. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijom.2011.04.001
21. Kurabe K, Kojima T, Kato Y, Saito I, Kobayashi T (2016) Impact of orthognathic surgery on oral health-related quality of life in patients with jaw deformities. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 45(12):1513-1519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijom.2016.07.003
22. Bertolini F, Russo V, Sansebastiano G (2000) Pre- and postsurgical psycho-emotional aspects of the orthognathic surgery patient. Int J Adult Orthodon Orthognath Surg 15(1):16-23
23. Pollock M, Fernandes RM, Becker LA, Featherstone R, Hartling L (2016) What guidance is available for researchers conducting overviews of reviews of healthcare interventions? A scoping review and qualitative metasummary. Syst Rev 5(1):190. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-016-0367-5
24. Hunt OT, Johnston CD, Hepper PG, Burden DJ (2001) The psychosocial impact of orthognathic surgery: a systematic review.

Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 120(5):490-497. https://doi.org/10.1067/mod.2001.118402
25. Meger MN, Fatturi AL, Gerber JT, Weiss SG, Rocha JS, Scariot R, Wambier LM (2021) Impact of orthognathic surgery on quality of life of patients with dentofacial deformity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 59(3):265-271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjoms.2020.08.014
26. Pacheco-Pereira C, Pereira JR, Dick BD, Perez A, Flores-Mir C (2015) Factors associated with patient and parent satisfaction after orthodontic treatment: a systematic review. Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 148(4):652-659. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2015.04.039
27. Macey R, Thiruvenkatachari B, O'Brien K, Batista KBSL (2020) Do malocclusion and orthodontic treatment impact oral health? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 157(6):738-744.e10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2020.01.015
28. Yao K, Zhu G, Chen M, Zhang B, Wu Y, Li P (2020) Effect of surgery-first orthognathic approach on oral health-related quality of life: a systematic review. Angle Orthod 90(5):723-733. https://doi.org/10.2319/112619-749.1
29. Mandava P, Singaraju GS, Obili S, Nettam V, Vatturu S, Erugu S (2021) Impact of self-esteem on the relationship between orthodontic treatment and the oral health-related quality of life in patients after orthodontic treatment - a systematic review. Med Pharm Rep 94(2):158-69. https://doi.org/10.15386/mpr-1843
30. Andiappan M, Gao W, Bernabe E, Kandala NB, Donaldson AN (2015) Malocclusion, orthodontic treatment, and the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-14): systematic review and meta-analysis. Angle Orthod 85(3):493-500. https://doi.org/10.2319/051414-348.1
31. Piassi E, Antunes LS, Antunes LAA (2016) Orthodontic treatment reduces the impact on children and adolescents' oral health-related quality of life. Indian J Dent Res 27(2):213-219. https://doi.org/10.4103/0970-9290.183122
32. Soh CL, Narayanan V (2013) Quality of life assessment in patients with dentofacial deformity undergoing orthognathic surgery - a systematic review. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 42(8):974-980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijom.2013.03.023
33. Zhou Y, Wang Y, Wang X, Voliere G, Hu R (2014) The impact of orthodontic treatment on the quality of life a systematic review. BMC Oral Health 14:66. https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6831-14-66
34. Javidi H, Vettore M, Benson PE (2017) Does orthodontic treatment before the age of 18 years improve oral health-related quality of life? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 151(4):644-655. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2016.12.011
35. Broers DLM, van der Heijden GJMG, Rozema FR, de Jongh A (2017) Do patients benefit from orthognathic surgery? A systematic review on the effects of elective orthognathic surgery on psychosocial functioning and patient satisfaction. Eur J Oral Sci 125(6):411-418. https://doi.org/10.1111/eos.12371
36. Yi J, Lu W, Xiao J, Li X, Li Y, Zhao Z (2019) Effect of conventional combined orthodontic-surgical treatment on oral health-related quality of life: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 156(1):29-43.e5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2019.03.008
37. Zamboni R, de Moura FR, Brew MC, Rivaldo EG, Braz MA, Grossmann E, Bavaresco CS (2019) Impacts of orthognathic surgery on patient satisfaction, overall quality of life, and oral health-related quality of life: a systematic literature review. Int J Dent 16https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/2864216
38. Ferrando-Magraner E, García-Sanz V, Bellot-Arcís C, Montiel-Company J-M, Almerich-Silla J-M, Paredes-Gallardo V (2019) Oral health-related quality of life of adolescents after

orthodontic treatment A systematic review. J Clin Exp Dent 11(2):e194-202. https://doi.org/10.4317/jced.55527
39. Aromataris E, Fernandez R, Godfrey CM, Holly C, Khalil H, Tungpunkom P (2015) Summarizing systematic reviews: methodological development, conduct and reporting of an umbrella review approach. Int J Evid Based Healthc 13(3):132-40. https://doi.org/10.1097/XEB.000000000000055
40. Pollock M, Fernandes RM, Becker LA, Pieper D, Hartling L (2013) Overviews of reviews (Chapter V). In: Deeks JJ, Higgins JPT AD. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions.; Version 6.2 Available at: https://training.cochrane.org/handbook/current/chapter-v, Accessed Jan 20th 2022.
41. Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boultron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, Shamseer L, Tetzlaff JM, Akl EA, Brennan SE, Chou R, Glanville J, Grimshaw JM, Hrobjartsson A, Lalu MM, Li T, Loder EW, Mayo-Wilson E, McDonald S, McGuinness LA, Stewart LA, Thomas J, Tricco AC, Welch VA, Whiting P, Moher D (2021) The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ 372:n71. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71
42. Shea BJ, Reeves BC, Wells G, Thuku M, Hamel C, Moran J, Moher D, Tugwell P, Welch V, Kristjansson E, Henry DA (2017) AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews that include randomised or non-randomised studies of healthcare interventions, or both. BMJ 358:j4008. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j4008
43. Deeks JJ, Higgins JPT AD (2019) CHAPTER 10: analysing data and undertaking meta-analyses. In: Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. Available at: https://training.cochrane.org/handbook/current/chapter-10, Accessed 15th Dec 2021
44. Schunemann H, Brozek J, Guyatt G OA (2013) GRADE handbook for grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. The GRADE Working Group. Available at: https://gdt.gradepro.org/app/handbook/handbook.html, Accessed 15th Dec 2021
45. Dimberg L, Arnrup K, Bondemark L (2015) The impact of malocclusion on the quality of life among children and adolescents: a systematic review of quantitative studies. Eur J Orthod 37(3):238-247. https://doi.org/10.1093/ejo/cju046
46. Kragt L, Dhamo B, Wolvius EB, Ongkosuwito EM (2015) The impact of malocclusions on oral health-related quality of life in children—a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Oral Invest 20(8):1881-1894. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00784-015-1681-3
47. Liu Z, McGrath C, Hägg U (2009) The impact of malocclusion/ orthodontic treatment need on the quality of life. A systematic review Angle Orthod 79(3):585-591. https://doi.org/10.2319/042108-224.1
48. de Almeida AB, Leite ICG, Silva GA (2018) Evidence in Orthodontics related to qualitative research. Dental Press J Orthod 23(4):64-71. https://doi.org/10.1590/2177-6709.23.4.064-071.oar
49. Javidi H, Benson P (2015) The impact of malocclusion and its treatment on the oral health related quality of life of adults, assessed using the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP-14). Evid Based Dent 16(2):57-58. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ebd.6401100
50. Sun L, Wong HM, McGrath CPJ (2017) Relationship between the severity of malocclusion and oral health related quality of life: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Oral Health Prev Dent 15(6):503-517. https://doi.org/10.3290/j.ohpd.a38994
51. Sun L, Wong HM, McGrath CPJ (2018) Association between the severity of malocclusion, assessed by occlusal indices and oral health related quality of life: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Oral Health Prev Dent 16(3):211-223. https://doi.org/10.3290/j.ohpd.a40761
52. da Costa AC, Rodrigues FS, Heimer MV (2017) Self concept of dental aesthetics and its impact on the life of adolescents. Adolesc Saude 14(4):157-166

53. Alanko OME, Svedstrom-Oristo AL, Tuomisto MT (2010) Patients' perceptions of orthognathic treatment, well-being, and psychological or psychiatric status: a systematic review. Acta Odontol Scand 68(5):249-260. https://doi.org/10.3109/00016357.2010.494618
54. Feu D, Quintão CCA, Miguel JAM (2010) Quality of life instruments and their role in orthodontics. Dental Press J Orthod 15(6):61-70
55. Bo Z, Huang X, Huo S, Zhang C, Zhao S, Cen X et al (2020) Effect of clear aligners on oral health-related quality of life: a systematic review. Orthod Craniofac Res 23(4):363-370. https://doi.org/10.1111/ocr.12382
56. Gandedkar NH, Darendelier MA (2020) Combined orthodontic-surgical treatment may be an effective choice to improve oral health—related quality of life for individuals affected with severe dentofacial deformities. J Evid Based Dent Pract 20(3):101462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebdp.2020.101462
57. Nicholsu A-R, Dragomirescu A-O, Manea M, Ionescu E (2020) The impact of malocclusions on the quality of life and psychological status A systematic review. Int J Med Dent 24(3):424-433
58. Abdullah WA (2015) Changes in quality of life after orthognathic surgery in Saudi patients. Saudi Dent J 27(3):161-164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sdentj.2014.12.001
59. Gölzer JG, Becker OE, Haas Junior OL, Scolari N, Santos Melo MF, Heitz C, de Oliveira RB (2014) Assessing change in quality of life using the Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP) in patients with different dentofacial deformities undergoing orthognathic surgery: a before and after comparison. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 43(11):1352-1359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijom.2014.06.015
60. Soh CL, Narayanan V (2015) The impact of surgical correction on the quality of life in patients with dentofacial deformity-a prospective study. J Oral Maxillofac Surgery Med Pathol 27(3):323-327. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoms.2014.03.003
61. Baherimoghaddam T, Tabrizi R, Naseri N, Pouzesh A, Oshagh M, Torkan S (2016) Assessment of the changes in quality of life of patients with class II and III deformities during and after orthodontic-surgical treatment. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 45(4):476-485. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijom.2015.10.019
62. Alanko O, Tuomisto MT, Peltomäki T, Tolveranen M, Soukka T, Svedström-Oristo AL (2017) A longitudinal study of changes in psychosocial well-being during orthognathic treatment. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 46(11):1380-1386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijom.2017.05.004
63. Benson PE, Da'as T, Johal A, Mandall NA, Williams AC, Baker SR, Marshman Z (2015) Relationships between dental appearance, self-esteem, socio-economic status, and oral health-related quality of life in UK schoolchildren: a 3-year cohort study. Eur J Orthod 37(5):481-90. https://doi.org/10.1093/ejo/cju076
64. Antoun JS, Fowler PV, Jack HC, Farella M (2015) Oral health-related quality of life changes in standard, cleft, and surgery patients after orthodontic treatment. Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 148(4):568-575. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2015.03.028
65. Balshem H, Helfand M, Schünemann HJ, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Brozek J, Vist GE, Falck-Ytter Y, Meerpohl J, Norris S, Guyatt GH (2011) GRADE guidelines: 3 Rating the quality of evidence. J Clin Epidemiol 64(4):401-6

Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
